

--- PDF PAGE 1 ---

Traveler’s Guide to Ancient Ohio


--- PDF PAGE 2 ---

Thinking About Ohio
Civic Architecture Across America: Extraordinary Views,  
by Thomas R. Schiff
Bicycling Through Paradise: Historical Tours Around Cincinnati,  
Updated and Revised, by Kathleen Smythe and Chris Hanlin
Bicycling Through Dayton: Twenty-­One Historical Tours,  
by Kathleen Smythe
Traveler’s Guide to Ancient Ohio, by John E. Hancock
Traveler’s Guide to 
Ancient Ohio
John E. Hancock
with a foreword by Chief Glenna J. Wallace
Ohio University Press, Athens
in association with
University of Cincinnati Press


--- PDF PAGE 3 ---

Ohio University Press, Athens, Ohio 45701
ohioswallow.com
© 2026 by Ohio University Press
All rights reserved
To obtain permission to quote, reprint, or otherwise 
reproduce or distribute material from Ohio University Press 
publications, please contact our rights and permissions 
department at 
(740) 593-­1154 or (740) 593-­4536 (fax).
All photographs are by the author unless credited otherwise. 
All uncredited digital images are by media design staff 
under the author’s direction (1996–­2016) at the University of 
Cincinnati. Uncredited reproductions from pre-­1920s 
publications are in the public domain.
Maps by Aaron Keirns and Janice Radlove
Video editing by Nathan Harris
Cover photo: Serpent Mound, Adams County, Ohio
The Ohio University Press European Union safety repre- 
sentative may be contacted about General Product Safety 
Regulation (GPSR) concerns at Mare Nostrum Group B.V., 
Doelen 72, 4831 GR Breda The Netherlands, 
or by email at gpsr@mare-nostrum.co.uk.
Printed in the United States of America
Ohio University Press books are printed 
on acid-­free paper ∞ ™
Library of Congress Control Number: 2026933672
For my wife, Marcia Alscher, for all those road trips 
and all that patience with the deadlines, 
 
and for my Sealyham Terrier, Sir Sterling, 
for his quiet company through 
countless hours of desk work.


--- PDF PAGE 4 ---

vii
Contents
Foreword
Chief Glenna J. Wallace	
ix
Preface	
xi
1	
The Region and Its History
	
	
How to Use This Guide, Geographic and  
	
	
Chronological Background	
1
2	
World Heritage Route: West
	
	
Lebanon, Fort Ancient Earthworks, the Paint Valley,  
	
	
the Chillicothe Area	
24
3	
World Heritage Route: East
	
	
Chillicothe to Tarlton, Lancaster, Granville, and Newark	
73
4	
Upper Miami Route
	
	
Lebanon to Xenia, Yellow Springs, the Dayton Area,  
	
	
and Miamisburg	
105
5	
Lower Miami Route
	
	
Hamilton, Miami Fort, Cincinnati, and the  
	
	
Little Miami Valley	
119
6	
Brush Creek Route
	
	
Serpent Mound, Fort Hill, Adams County, and the  
	
	
Rocky Fork Gorge	
133
The grand, wide entrance into Newark’s Great Circle earthwork is amplified  
by deep, symmetrical ditches.


--- PDF PAGE 5 ---

ix
viii
Contents
7	
Upper Scioto Route
	
	
Circleville, the Columbus Area, and the  
	
	
Ohio History Connection	
150
8	
Lower Scioto Route
	
	
Tremper Mound, Portsmouth, and the  
	
	
Hanging Rock Iron Region	
162
9	
Hocking Route
	
	
Lancaster to the Hocking Hills’ Nature Preserves,  
	
	
and Athens	
174
10	 Muskingum Route
	
	
Newark to Flint Ridge, the Muskingum Valley,  
	
	
and Marietta	
188
	
Resources
	
	
Videos and Animations, Sample Itineraries,  
	
	
Further Reading, Online Information	
205
	
Credits	
209
	
Index	
211
Foreword
Most people think of history’s marvels of engineering as products of 
stone, bronze, or iron—­the works of vast, conquering empires. I once 
held that view too. Years ago, before I became actively involved in my 
tribe and embraced my spiritual and cultural heritage, I traveled to 
many great monuments and World Heritage sites—­the Egyptian pyr-
amids, the Roman Colosseum, the Athenian Acropolis, the Great Wall 
of China—­picturing them as the ultimate architectural masterpieces.
But when I first saw the geometric earthworks of the Hopewell 
culture in Ohio, built by Native Americans who were once considered 
“savages,” I instantly recognized what great feats of genius they are. Ev-
erything I had read in books and been taught in numerous educational 
settings about our Ancestors was challenged, and I could no longer be 
silent and not speak out on behalf of these wonders and their builders.
Here, laid across the landscape not with concrete but with 
Mother Earth, one basketful at a time, were squares, circles, and 
mounds with repeated placements of breathtaking and unques-
tionable precision. They were not monuments to a single ruler but 
communal masterpieces depicting their builders’ connections to 
each other and to the cosmos. It became clear to me that we have 
been ignoring, minimizing, and eliminating the hidden history 
of this continent—­stories of brilliance, community, and spiritual 
depth that now need to reshape our understanding.
Southern Ohio is the place to discover these stories. Most of 
these amazing places are located here—­including the eight now 
designated as UNESCO World Heritage sites and known as the 
Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks. They give testimony to an 
extraordinary civilization. They reveal a profound architectural 
genius by creating sacred art from Mother Earth, combined with 
knowledge of the Sky World above.
This book invites you to step onto that sacred ground, to seek 
that profound spirituality by experiencing these places in their 


--- PDF PAGE 6 ---

xi
x
Foreword
rich cultural, historical, and landscape settings. Author John E. 
Hancock combines the appreciative eye of a well-­traveled architect 
with braided strands of ideas from thirty years of personal experi-
ence and collaboration with tribal scholars, leaders, and citizens, 
along with numerous other content experts who help illuminate 
the genius of this Indigenous civilization.
The geometrical and astronomical acumen of these ancient peo-
ple is staggering. Newark’s Octagon Earthworks align perfectly with 
the complex 18.6-­year moonrise cycle, a triumph of observation that 
surpasses any other on the planet. This was not a lucky or accidental 
coincidence; it was a deliberate, monumental expression of a deep-­
seated scientific and spiritual understanding. These intricate land-
forms required sophisticated knowledge and precision layout tools. 
They stand as a testament to the power of communal cooperation, 
where thousands of Native Americans worked together over genera-
tions to shape Mother Earth into a celestial calendar.
Traveler’s Guide to Ancient Ohio takes you along paths away from 
the busy roads of our modern and often frenetic lives, and toward 
an older and more profound history. The beauty of visiting these 
sites is that if you stand still, and wait long enough, they will reveal 
themselves slowly. As you walk the path of any of these earthworks, 
you won’t just see piles of dirt. You will feel the peacefulness, the 
tranquility, the inspiration of a spiritual connection to ancient cos-
mologies. By engaging with these places directly, you are doing 
more than sightseeing. You are participating in a quiet revolution 
of understanding. You are replacing centuries of misinformation 
with firsthand knowledge and reverence for a truly remarkable and 
inspirational civilization. And you will walk away inspired, wanting 
to be a better person.
The legacy of the earthwork builders is not one of crumbling 
empires but of enduring wisdom laid out across the land itself. 
They built not for conquest but for ceremony, for gathering, and 
for connection—­with each other, with the land, with their Creator, 
and with the universe. As you journey through this guide, you will 
be invited to see not only the remains of a great civilization but a 
living testament to a different kind of human genius—­an uncom-
mon genius. It is a legacy that still has much to teach us about what 
truly matters.
Chief Glenna J. Wallace
Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma
Preface
“I Had No Idea.” One day in the mid-­1990s, after I had been teaching 
the architecture of the world’s great civilizations at the University 
of Cincinnati for fifteen years, a new graduate student came to my 
office and said, “I want to do my thesis on the ancient earthworks 
of Ohio.” And I said, “The what?” When he showed me the beauti-
ful lithographs in E.G. Squier and E.H. Davis’s 1848 volume, Ancient 
Monuments of the Mississippi Valley, I was, like many others before 
and since, astonished: Lying right out there across our southern 
Ohio landscapes were the remains of huge, enigmatic works of  
architectural, geometrical, and astronomical genius.
With family, friends, or students in tow, I hit the back roads of 
southern Ohio to find them. But many, so beautifully delineated in 
the nineteenth century, were gone—­erased by modern development 
or agriculture. And many of the surviving ones were hard to see—­
forested, or degraded, or just too large to comprehend. The ones that 
could be seen offered an unusual, subtle architectural experience, 
unlike any other monuments I had ever encountered. Moreover, 
these places seemed to be known only to archaeologists; no one in 
my field had heard of them, nor, as I soon learned, had most of the 
Indigenous descendants of their builders.
The Ancient Ohio Trail. I was motivated to share the story, but 
if these magnificent places were to be brought out of obscu-
rity for public audiences, they would need two things: visual-
ization tools to make them comprehensible, and interpretive 
voices from diverse perspectives. So, with funding from the 
National Endowment for the Humanities and others, I led in-
terdisciplinary teams at the University of Cincinnati to design 
digital media programs where computer graphics showcased the 
sites’ elusive scope and conceptual power, and where Indigenous 
leaders and other scholars complemented what the archaeologists 
were telling us about their history and meanings.


--- PDF PAGE 7 ---

xii
xiii
Preface
Preface
These projects took us out among the region’s historic towns 
and scenic landscapes, revealing rich, varied evidence of Ohio’s 
complex histories and diverse geographies, as well as its brilliant 
ancient inhabitants. Those travel experiences persuaded me that 
the equivalent of a Michelin Green Guide to southern Ohio was 
needed. This book is the result: It is an expanded update of those 
media projects and our Ancient Ohio Trail website. Readers may 
also detect an homage to all those well-­worn Michelin guides still 
on my bookshelf from the European travels of my earlier career.
The Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks. In 2023, eight Ohio earth-
work sites were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List—­
specifically for their landscape design genius, and for their testi-
mony to the distinctive American Indian culture that built them 
two millennia ago. World Heritage status implies that visitors’ ex-
periences of these places—­with their scenic, historic, and interpre-
tive contexts—­should be both regionally coherent, and at a global  
curatorial standard. My aim is to help visitors appreciate their 
often-­subtle forms and their nearly incomprehensible scope, to-
gether with the range of ideas that enrich and ground their mean-
ings. Some content and themes here will overlap with my (and 
several collaborators’) 2026 re-­edition of those eight sites’ UNESCO 
nomination document, entitled Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks, 
but the two volumes have very different emphases.
Acknowledgments. After thirty years, there have been far more 
collaborators in this work than can be named here. I must begin, 
though, with my late, brilliant, Ancient Ohio Trail coauthor Cath-
ryn Long, many of whose beautiful phrases remain in these pag-
es, and my University of Cincinnati digital media team leaders 
Jose Kozan and Elizabeth Bartley. Many of the key scholars, tribal 
leaders, and others whom we interviewed are quoted here, or ap-
pear in the linked videos—­including Brad Lepper, Bret Ruby, Marti 
Chaatsmith, and Chief Glenna Wallace. Many of these same people 
(and more) were also central to the World Heritage effort, and for 
this book project they continued to be generous with their time, 
expert advice, and local knowledge.
Others provided special encouragement toward the long-­
term goal of regionally curated tourism, notably Nancy Stranahan,  
Melody 
Young, 
Melinda 
Huntley, 
and 
the 
Ohio 
History 
 
Connection’s Jennifer Aultman and Jerry Dannemiller. For route 
testing, I must thank Buck Niehoff, Hope Taft, and friends, who,  
over several consecutive weekends in 2021, walked this book’s  
World Heritage Route with heroic logistical support from  
Gary Meisner. For help with new site maps, photographs, and videos,  
I am indebted to Aaron Keirns, Rich Bitting, Steve Plattner, and 
Nathan Harris. Janice Radlove provided enormous help with both 
route maps and page designs. Finally, I thank Liz Scarpelli and Pam  
Wissman at the University of Cincinnati Press for their confidence in 
this project, and Beth Pratt, Tyler Balli, Jeff Kallet, and Laura André 
at Ohio University Press for their professional expertise throughout 
the process.
John E. Hancock
Professor Emeritus of Architecture
University of Cincinnati
August 25, 2025


--- PDF PAGE 8 ---

1
The Region and Its History
1
The Region and Its History
THE REGION
A Brilliant Civilization. Two thousand years ago, here in southern 
Ohio, Ancestors of today’s American Indians created the world’s 
largest concentration of monumental earthen architecture—­works 
of unparalleled scope, genius, and precision. For 400 years, their 
ideas dominated the cultural and religious life of half the conti-
nent. Much evidence of their huge ceremonial centers and their 
rich cultural life remains across this region, well managed in 
public parks and preserves, and increasingly illuminated today 
by the perspectives of the modern Tribal Nations who are among 
their descendants. Immerse yourself in the heartland of ancient  
America, where astonishing earthen monuments are still here to 
tell the stories—­of their ancient origins, their modern interpreta-
tions, and their landscape settings.
A Complex History. This book is about the earthworks themselves 
but also situates them in other contexts. The precise enclosures, 
effigies, embankments, mounds, and walled hilltops reflect the 
lives and knowledge of their builders, but later centuries have 
added other histories. Two hundred years ago, Ohio was the focus 
of American expansion, and during the decades around 1800, the 
surveyors and settlers who crossed the Allegheny Mountains en-
countered these intact but forest-­covered monuments—­admiring 
and measuring them, but also misinterpreting and destroying 
them. Ohio soon became the focus of war and repression against 
American Indians, even as mounds were being looted for treasure, 
and as many now-­vanished sites were being documented in some of 
America’s first pioneering archaeological efforts.
Mound Hill Cemetery, near Amesville, is one of many settler burial grounds quietly  
acknowledging the commemorative power of mounds (see page 187).


--- PDF PAGE 9 ---

2
3
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
A Varied Landscape. Southern Ohio holds layers of geological and 
cultural history as rich as anywhere else on the planet. The deep 
geology of the region has left a wide variety of landscapes and  
ecologies. Glaciers carved broad expanses that had long before 
been sedimented beneath an ancient sea. Rivers carved narrow 
canyons or were reoriented in gigantic, ancient valleys. Today, 
eroded bedrock canyons shelter exotic species. Geological and eco-
logical zones meet, with often dramatic scenic consequences and 
unusual ecological abundance. The region’s brilliant Indigenous 
peoples thrived in these forests and prairies, and among these hills 
and rivers. They built earthworks whose subtle forms seem to echo 
the hills, valleys, and waterways.
POINTS OF VIEW
Ways of Knowing. The question “What are the earthworks?” does 
not have a single answer. When I first set out to learn about them in 
the 1990s, it seemed the discourse belonged only to archaeologists. 
The earthworks were routinely spoken of “as archaeological sites.” 
But the Native people I met saw them instead “as meaningful ances-
tral places.” At the time, these differing viewpoints felt contentious—­
Western science versus Indigenous tradition, and with emphasis 
on the “versus.” But since then, respectful collaborative approaches 
have been developing, and innovative blends of archaeological and 
Indigenous knowledge are beginning to illuminate the earthworks 
and their builders’ culture in new ways.
What follows in these pages are concise versions of the gen-
eral knowledge from both these domains, plus others, summarized 
from three decades of reading, interviewing, conversing, working, 
and touring with most of the leading site experts, with many Indig-
enous persons both in Ohio and Oklahoma, and with other scholars 
in related fields.
The Traveler’s View. As I toured these places, often with visiting 
students, architects, and scholars from around the world, I no-
ticed we were seeing them in yet another way—­“as cultural heritage 
destinations.” The stories from those initial “as’s” now lived within 
place-­experiences where human meaning and identification, spa-
tial movement and sensation, visual form and detail, embodied 
memory and anticipation, contextual settings and landscapes, all 
operated at once within an open interpretive engagement. In other 
words, the sites were now functioning “as works of architecture.”
World Heritage inscription now underscores this second pair 
of “as’s” because like their iconic counterparts from other global 
cultures—­the Parthenon, the Great Wall of China, Machu Picchu, 
and the rest—­Ohio’s earthworks will now tell their many stories in 
this way—­as the experienced, embodied touchstones of their mak-
ers’ brilliant civilization.
Positioning This Book. Each of these four points of view (and others) 
suggests questions and prioritizes approaches. But they are cumu-
lative and complementary, since the earthworks are all these things 
and more. My background as an architectural educator, traveler, and 
tour leader defines the central goal of this book which is to interpret, 
summarize, and present general knowledge and other related ideas 
(mostly from others) within an engaging, appreciation-­enhancing, 
spatially organized, full-­regional touring experience.
HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE
Nine Curated Routes. The region’s three international airports (John 
Glenn Columbus International Airport, CMH; Dayton International 
Airport, DAY; and Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Air-
port, CVG), and main interstate highways (I-­70, I-­71, and I-­75) connect 
quickly and easily to the routes, each of which is anchored by a major 
city or an important historic town. The World Heritage Route (divided 
East and West) connects the seven publicly accessible, UNESCO-­
inscribed Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks. Branch routes follow 
the valleys of the Ohio River’s principal, south-­flowing tributaries to 
connect other major earthwork sites like Miami Fort, Serpent Mound, 
Marietta, and other points of interest. The recommended routes 
avoid interstates, as well as strip and chain development zones (easily 
found when needed), favoring scenic drives and historic towns. Fol-
low them in any direction, sequence, or depth. Link and customize 
them for any adventure through the Ohio Valley’s deep histories—­
rewarding journeys lasting from one day to three weeks, or more.
Wayfinding and Orientation. This book provides street addresses 
suitable (and tested) for standard car or smartphone navigation sys-
tems. These systems recognize many destination names, but not all. 


--- PDF PAGE 10 ---

The Region and Its History


--- PDF PAGE 11 ---

6
7
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
Turn-­by-­turn suggestions are given here only when a certain  
experience is being recommended. Obtain information about hours 
and admissions (because it may change often) from the managing 
agencies’ websites, which are cited in each case. Earthwork site 
trail maps take you to numbered locations keyed to paragraphs—­
generally related to what is visible at that spot. Consult posted trail 
guides to confirm details or learn more.
Ratings and Seasons. Towns, sites, features, and other destinations 
are rated to help with prioritizing. Three stars means “worth the 
journey” or “don’t miss this.” At the earthwork sites, these judg-
ments mainly consider the architectural experience—­how vivid 
is the combination of seeing the earthworks and appreciating their 
meaning or formal impact—­and the text generally gives the ratio-
nale. The forms can be elusive, as some are in partial ruins, forest 
covered, too large to see across, or all of these. The time of year and 
time of day matter; for forested sites like Fort Ancient, October to 
April is best. The beauty of any site is most evident early or late in 
the day when shadows help to reveal their subtle forms.
Other Resources. Of course, this region has much more to offer—­
other themes and topics such as aviation history, the Underground 
Railroad, and many places of historical and architectural interest, 
especially in the larger cities. These are beyond the scope of this 
book but easily researched elsewhere. Museums include county 
historical societies (notably those in Warren and Ross); important 
regional museums in Portsmouth, Marietta, and Newark; and the 
major metropolitan or statewide institutions in Cincinnati, Day-
ton, and Columbus. Perhaps most significant for this topic is the 
Ohio History Connection’s Columbus facility, the Ohio History Cen-
ter, as well as that agency’s many historic sites across the region. 
With only a few exceptions, food and lodging suggestions are also  
beyond the scope of this book, but are readily found on county 
tourism websites, as well as online booking and rating services.
A Word About Naming. All place names in this book are in Ohio un-
less otherwise noted. The names of the major earthwork-­building 
cultures (Adena and Hopewell) are Western colonial impositions, 
and out of respect for current Native American preferences, they 
are never used here to refer to Indigenous Ancestors—­to any peo-
ple or tribe—­only to things (such as earthworks, time periods, 
practices, objects, and so on). Similarly, this book reflects a general 
(though not unanimous) agreement that our predecessors on this 
continent, and modern tribal citizens, may be referred to respect-
fully as Native American, Indigenous, or American Indian—­but 
never with the term “Indian” alone.
EARLY CHRONOLOGY
Ohio’s Bedrock. The land that is now Ohio lay beneath an ancient 
sea around 400 million years ago. The formation and erosion of 
mountain ranges to the east (now the Appalachians) and the drying 
seas left broad swaths of limestone in the west (beneath Cincin-
nati or prominent in the Clifton and Rocky Fork Gorges), as well 
as broad sandstone ridges to the east (Blackhand Gorge and the 
Hocking Hills region). The ancient sea and swampy forests also left 
deposits of coal and salt in the southeastern counties, which sup-
ported the state’s early industries.
VISITING SACRED PLACES
Native sacred places are . . . where Native people go to pray, to sing, to 
dance, for the good day, the precious earth, the blessing waters, the sweet 
air, and a peaceful life for all living beings.  .  .  . The best advice for the 
public at these places may be found in the Cheyenne instruction “Walk 
gently through life.” The protocols for Native sacred and historic places are 
the same as the unwritten rules for guests at a monument, cemetery, royal 
garden, or grand palace.
—Suzan Shown Harjo (Hodulgee Muscogee, Cheyenne)
The walls of Fort Ancient 
are at their most beautiful 
in low Sun angles from 
October to April.


--- PDF PAGE 12 ---

8
9
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
A Diagonal Seam. Today, the main geographic structure of the re-
gion is generally flat terrain to the northwest (the glacial till plains), 
and intricate hills and hollows in the southeast (the Appalachian 
Plateau). These zones meet along a distinct boundary running diag-
onally from roughly Serpent Mound to Chillicothe, to Newark, and 
on to the northeast. This line is the northwestern edge of the Appa-
lachian Plateau, a zone of layered rock pressed upward by the for-
mation of the Appalachian chain and since deeply carved by rivers 
and streams. West of this line, the three major eras of glaciation—­
all of which stopped in nearly the same place—­reshaped the land-
scape and redirected the rivers between 3 million and 11,000 years 
ago. Driving from west to east today (approaching Granville or 
Chillicothe, for example) the front range of these unglaciated hills 
can be quite prominent.
The Preglacial Teays River. Before the first Pleistocene glacier 
(about 2.6 million years ago), the Ohio lands were drained by the 
Teays River, a huge waterway that rose in the high Appalachians, 
came down through West Virginia’s New River Gorge and Kanawha  
Valley and past Huntington to near Portsmouth, and then went 
north past Columbus and west across Indiana and Illinois to join the 
Mississippi. Two huge valleys between Chillicothe and Portsmouth 
are the remains of two of the Teays system’s ancient channels. 
Most of the region’s other large valleys, such as around Cincinnati, 
once carried its north-­flowing tributaries. By about 1 million years 
ago, the advancing glacier had dammed up these rivers, forming a 
huge lake which, as it spilled over, carved new channels heading 
southwest, including today’s Ohio River.
Till Plains, New Rivers. The flatter landscapes to the northwest are 
the areas covered by all three glacial advances. By their final retreat, 
about 12,000 years ago, they had left deep layers of debris (glacial 
till) across the land, directing new rivers to flow south toward the 
newly carved Ohio Valley. The Lower Scioto, and to a lesser extent 
the Great Miami, are the clearest examples of these new, smaller  
rivers taking over the huge valleys of the preglacial Teays system. 
The layered structure of these Teays-­age valleys provided ideal sites 
for the geometric earthworks—­perhaps most clearly visible at the 
Hopeton Earthworks. The large, flat, upper terraces were the flood 
plains of the ancient rivers—­well drained by deep gravel deposits, yet 
well above flooding by the current, smaller rivers.
Natural Wonders, Rich Ecologies. The ancient seas and rivers,  
the actions of the glaciers, and the varied topography created an 
abundance of natural wonders: rock-­faced canyons, wide-­open 
prairies, pockets of glacial-­era plants, remote dark-­Sky regions, 
deep forests, beautiful clear streams, abundant and diverse flora 
and fauna. Today, this makes for beautiful scenery and offers 
settings for recreational pleasure. But for millennia, these rich 
and abundant overlapping ecologies generously supported the  
Indigenous cultures that grew and thrived here in what we now call 
Ohio.
People 
Arrive 
(13,000 
to 
8,000 
BCE). 
The 
first 
people 
 
appeared in this region while glaciers still covered much of North  
America. They arrived from Asia by the ancient Bering Land Bridge 
to Alaska, or by boat, and spread, over many generations, across 
the continent. Now called “Paleoindians,” they were in the Ohio  
Valley as early as 13,000 years ago, living in mobile bands,  
gathering plants, and hunting. Their distinctive spear points have 
been found in the bones of long extinct ice age animals like the  
mastodon. They were skilled stone workers and discovered the  
beautiful rainbow-­colored stone from Ohio’s Flint Ridge, used by their 
descendants for centuries and still prized by flintknappers today.
Viewed from Chillicothe’s Grandview Cemetery, the huge, ancient Teays River Valley stretches 
southward, now carrying the much smaller Scioto.


--- PDF PAGE 13 ---

10
11
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
Ecological Transition (8000 to 1500 BCE). When the glaciers melted, 
the tundra and pine forests of eastern North America were replaced 
by the ecological environments we know today: hardwood forests 
threaded by many rivers and streams. The large ice age animals be-
came extinct or moved northward, replaced gradually by deer and 
other woodland animals. The new environment (of this “Archaic” 
period) also presented a wealth of nuts, fruits, plants, and edible 
roots. People began to plant seeds and tend gardens, making east-
ern North America one of only a handful of places on Earth where 
agriculture began without outside influence. Over several millen-
nia, the changing flora and fauna, the forests and rivers, the hills 
and valleys, gave rise not only to new ways of life, but also to new 
beliefs—­a Woodland cosmology—­about the meanings and relation-
ships in the environment.
THE EARTHWORK BUILDERS
Adena Culture (1500 BCE to 100 CE). The first burial mounds in 
the Ohio Valley reflect new skills and customs. People still moved 
periodically, but they began to make pottery and erect thousands 
of great earthen burial structures around the Ohio River and its 
tributaries, showing a strong sense of community. Archaeologists 
named this culture “Adena” after Thomas Worthington’s Chilli-
cothe estate, where a mound excavation in 1906 revealed its typ-
ical characteristics. These people produced beautiful ceremonial 
objects and developed elaborate mound architecture, including 
circular ditches, pavements, and walls. Later Hopewell practices 
overlapped with the Adena, in years and in territory; they may have 
been the same people, or near neighbors with different views but 
mutual respect.
Adena Architecture. The markers of the Adena culture are the thou-
sands of burial mounds across the region, including many in West 
Virginia and Kentucky. Most often, they stand alone in river val-
leys or on hilltops. The Miamisburg Mound is the largest example 
in Ohio, and Marietta’s Conus Mound is the best surviving exam-
ple with an intact ring and ditch around it. Their profiles vary, but 
generally they are either spherical or conical. This book features 
several other Adena mounds—­for their unusual form (Norwood), 
exceptional beauty (Zaleski), or dramatic setting (Shrum). Despite 
much continuity from these Adena traditions, the Hopewell in-
creases in the size and complexity of earthworks—­and the quantity 
of ceremonial artistry—­were sudden and dramatic.
Hopewell Culture (100 BCE to 400 CE). Great new inspirations ush-
ered in Ancient Ohio’s golden age. People began to assemble over 
many generations, creating complex earthworks, enormous in 
scale, precise in geometry, and often aligned with celestial events.  
WATER, EARTH, AND SKY
The traditions of the Indigenous Ancestors in this Great Valley of the 
Ohio were intimately connected to the natural world—­to the riverine 
landscapes and the creatures of the forest. American Indian religion, ways 
of life, and beliefs about the world still hold a respectful kinship with all 
these things. A widespread and long-­standing idea connects all things 
within a three-­layered conception of the universe—­the Sky is the Above 
World, the Earth we live on is in the middle, and the Beneath World is a 
watery domain. Creation stories tell of the land—­the Earth—­being brought 
up out of the water by an animal, often to be placed on a turtle’s back. 
Each of these layers has its kindred creatures, but also its associated 
spirit powers: The Thunderbirds live in the Above World, and the Great 
Serpent or the Underwater Panther lives in the Beneath World. Mounds and 
earthworks (and the things placed in them) reflect these beliefs in 
multiple ways. Those connections are apparent when water is part of an 
earthwork’s design, or when small woodland creatures adorn the bowls of 
ceremonial smoking pipes whose columns of smoke rise into the Sky.
The now-­lost 
Biggs mound in 
South Portsmouth, 
Kentucky, was 
an example of 
an Adena mound 
with a surrounding 
ditch and ring.


--- PDF PAGE 14 ---

12
13
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
Beneath carefully mounded layers of Earth, they left elaborate buri-
als of their leaders and loved ones, accompanied by beautifully 
crafted objects that reveal supreme artistic skill and the great reach 
of their trade networks. Burials indicate that there were no royal fam-
ilies or institutional hierarchies. The society’s leaders earned their 
power and expertise in a variety of areas; these would have included 
supervising the design and construction of the elaborate earthwork 
complexes. From their southern Ohio heartland, Hopewell practices 
and interactions spread across much of North America. This culture 
is called “Hopewell” because its richest ceremonial site was found 
on Mordecai Cloud Hopewell’s farm, just west of Chillicothe, in the 
1890s.
Hopewell Architecture. The huge Earth-­walled enclosures were of 
two types: those surrounding irregular hilltops (Fort Ancient) and 
those enclosing precise geometric spaces (the sites at Newark, or 
the Seip and Hopeton Earthworks). Gateways into the spaces could 
be complex (Fortified Hill), extraordinarily monumental (Newark’s 
Great Circle), or subtly sophisticated (Newark’s Octagon). Beneath 
mounds and walls lie the remains of monumental timber struc-
tures: Open woodhenges or multichambered ceremonial halls 
housed the people’s elaborate ceremonial life and the burials of 
their deceased kin. Those remains (both people and buildings) 
were often burned before being buried. Ponds, pits, and ditches 
were lined with stone and clay to create water features.
Hopewell Genius. Many sites across the region used a common di-
mension of 1,054 feet (the diameter of Newark’s Observatory Circle, 
now called the “OCD”) or its simple divisions. The near-­pinpoint 
accuracy of these repetitions, even between sites that are many 
miles apart, shows how construction knowledge, methods, and 
equipment must have been extraordinarily sophisticated. Astro-
nomical alignments were equally precise: Diagonals of several 
squares align to solstice sunrises and sunsets. Newark’s Octagon 
Earthworks, High Bank Works, and Fort Ancient are the only set of 
monuments on Earth so far known to calibrate the key risings and 
settings of the Moon during its very complex 18.6-­year cycle.
Fort Ancient Culture (900 to 1650). After about 400 CE, forests began 
reclaiming the geometric and hilltop earthworks. The focus of com-
munity life shifted from these vast ceremonial centers to growing 
villages. By about 900 CE, the large-­scale cultivation of corn was 
ushering in a whole new type of economy. These developments 
were shared with groups along the Mississippi River—­notably at 
Cahokia (near today’s St. Louis) and other large cities of the time. In 
the central Ohio Valley, they have been named the “Fort Ancient” 
culture because one of their villages was built near the much older 
(Hopewell-­era) walls of Fort Ancient.
Effigies and Villages. These village dwellers continued to build 
burial mounds, but more distinctive were their effigies—­Granville’s 
Alligator Mound (which is more likely the Underwater Panther), 
and of course the Great Serpent Mound in Adams County. Both have 
been dated to around 1100 CE, and so were the last major American 
Indian earthwork projects in the region. Substantial villages with 
ditched enclosures and a corn-­based economy were likely a pattern 
that endured into the lives of the Shawnee and Miami Tribes at the 
time of contact, a story well told at SunWatch Village near Dayton, 
and at Great Council State Park near Xenia.
CONTACT, MIGRATIONS, CONFLICTS
Horrific Plagues. Within just a few decades after Columbus and de 
Soto arrived in North America, more than 80 percent of its Indige-
nous population died—­victims of fast-­spreading European diseases 
to which they had no immunity. This was easily the most tragic event 
in the history of the continent. Along ancient trails and trade routes, 
the new diseases moved much faster than the new people did, so 
when the first Europeans finally arrived in the Ohio Valley, the 
Hopewell Earth-­walled 
enclosures combined 
huge geometric shapes, 
most often circles and 
squares, as here at the 
Hopeton Earthworks 
near Chillicothe.


--- PDF PAGE 15 ---

14
15
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
damage had already been done. Especially with the death of elders, 
tribal traditions weakened and knowledge was lost. People watched 
desperately as the old, reliable cures failed against the new diseases. 
All this sudden death and loss may help explain why, when Europe-
ans first encountered the Natives here, they could learn so little from 
them about who had built the earthworks, or why.
Trade and Migration. By the 1600s, not only had the ancient earthwork-­
building traditions faded, but large tribal migrations were underway. 
In what are called the Beaver Wars, the Iroquois were expanding into 
the Ohio Country from their homeland in upstate New York, scatter-
ing other tribes. They were after wider territories from which to sup-
ply the fast-­growing colonial and European market for furs, which 
they traded for manufactured goods including weapons. Meanwhile, 
other tribes were arriving in the area, having been displaced by the 
steady expansion of colonial settlement in the east and south. The 
first French and British traders to cross the Alleghenies encountered 
Miami, Wyandot, Ottawa, Shawnee, and Delaware (Lenape) people, 
among others. While no tribe is uniquely connected across the cen-
turies to the earthwork builders, all Eastern Woodland tribes share a 
common heritage, with ancestral sources in—­and some continuity of 
belief with—­the Adena, Hopewell, and Fort Ancient cultures.
The French and Indian War. By the 1750s, the struggle between France 
and Britain for colonial dominance in North America became open 
warfare, and from Nova Scotia to Virginia, both sides relied on military 
alliances with various Tribal Nations. Their traders and negotiators were 
in the Ohio Country setting up shop in large Indigenous settlements 
such as Lower Shawneetown at today’s Portsmouth. By 1758, the British 
had taken the Ohio lands from the French, and they ultimately won 
Canada five years later. Some of the Natives and colonials learned each 
other’s ways and languages. The lives of famous adventurers Daniel 
Boone and Simon Kenton reflect the complex, shifting relationships 
between the Euro-­Americans and the Indigenous peoples—­trade, 
diplomacy, capture, and occasionally friendship; then settlement and 
resistance; but ultimately war, and finally Removal.
Encroachment and Conflict. The 1750s to ’70s saw many skirmishes 
as more explorers and settlers pushed westward, first into Kentucky  
(then part of Virginia). During these decades, the Shawnee capital 
(chillicothe, or chief’s town) at Portsmouth was forced to retreat twice 
to locations farther up the Scioto. In 1774, on the eve of the American 
Revolution, escalating violence triggered a conflict called Dunmore’s 
War, in which Indigenous people fought unsuccessfully to defend their 
lands south of the Ohio against takeover by Virginia’s colonial militia. 
The peace treaty was signed on Ohio’s Pickaway Plains, near Circleville. 
Shawnee lands were being steadily threatened and encroached upon, 
and the tribe’s chillicothe had to move, for a third time, farther west to 
the Little Miami (now Great Council State Park, near Xenia).
The American Revolution. After 1776, these conflicts were part of the 
frontier theater of the Revolutionary War, and the Shawnee aligned 
with the British as a strategy to resist American colonial settlement 
in their homeland. Within a few years, the Americans were routing 
the British and their allies, and the Shawnee abandoned their town 
on the Little Miami too, as US government troops under George  
Rogers Clark (Daniel Boone among them) approached. Although the 
Ohio Country was not officially opened until the new nation won 
it from Great Britain in 1783, settlers were already pouring in. Fort 
Harmar was built in 1785 (at Marietta), initially to prevent pioneer 
squatting, but Fort Washington, just four years later (at Cincinnati), 
was built as an outpost to supply America’s wars against the tribes 
into the next decade.
The Northwest Indian War. All tribes in the region were threatened 
with losing their way of life and ability to feed their families—­the 
Shawnee, Miami, Lenape, Wyandotte, and Ottawa, among others. 
Many united to form the Northwestern Confederacy to resist Ameri-
can encroachment. Raids, murders, and reprisals on all sides ensued 
and escalated into all-­out frontier battles. Because the British were 
still the tribes’ allies, this warfare can be seen as a last phase of the 
American Revolution, only ending with the defeat of the Confeder-
acy in 1794 at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in northwest Ohio. The 
next year, the Treaty of Greenville removed the tribes entirely from 
southern Ohio, removed the British from everything south of the 
Great Lakes, and opened the future five-­state region of the Northwest 
Territory for American expansion.


--- PDF PAGE 16 ---

16
17
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
SETTLEMENT AND REMOVAL
Surveyors and Settlers. When the American Revolution ended in 
1783, the new nation had little cash, so used its vast new territo-
ries as revenue sources or as payments to the war’s veteran offi-
cers. The former occurred in southeastern Ohio when Congress 
chartered the New England–­based “Ohio Company of Associates” 
to buy and resell for profit vast areas around what became Mari-
etta and Athens. The latter occurred in southwestern Ohio when 
the Virginia Military District (the area between the Scioto and Little 
Miami Rivers) was given in large parcels to that state’s Revolution-
ary War veterans. Surveying had already begun by the mid-­1780s, 
but within twenty years of the tribes’ defeat in 1794, settlers were 
pouring in across the region—­first on Ohio River flatboats, and then 
along Colonel Ebenezer Zane’s new road—­and most of the region’s 
main towns were established. The forests came down quickly for 
log houses, firewood, furniture, and agricultural fields. Road net-
works developed (many following well-­established Indigenous 
routes) with coach stops at regular intervals.
Motives and Ideals. The availability of so much inexpensive land 
attracted all kinds of settlers, squatters, and speculators—­with var-
ious combinations of economic and moral motives. Quakers and 
abolitionists from the southern states, as well as some Virginia 
gentry like Thomas Worthington, wanted to leave slavery behind. 
Commerce-­oriented farmers and craftsmen were attracted out of 
the former colonies for a new start on fertile and abundant lands, 
as were recent arrivals on this continent escaping war and hard-
ship in Europe. Settlements grew rapidly among the newly opened 
fields, and rudimentary industries were founded, first those in sup-
port of agriculture such as tanning, meat and produce processing, 
and equipment manufacturing. On February 19, 1803, an act of 
Congress made Ohio the seventeenth state in the Union, with the 
new town of Chillicothe as its first capital.
Indian Removal. Despite the wars, treaties, and expulsions through 
the 1790s, many American Indians remained in Ohio. Only after Con-
gress passed the Indian Removal Act of 1830 did the last tribal rem-
nants leave the state—­by force, in their own “Trail of Tears”—­headed 
for designated “Indian Territories” west of the Mississippi (Kansas and 
Oklahoma at the time). The act was controversial, supported mainly 
by southern states like Georgia (which was in a bitter conflict with the 
Cherokee) and then-­president Andrew Jackson. It passed the House 
of Representatives by the thinnest of margins, with many Northern-
ers of the Whig Party—­among them Ohio’s congressional delegation—­
opposing it. Nonetheless, in what the world would now recognize as 
genocide or ethnic cleansing, American Indian tribes were forcibly 
removed to Oklahoma or other points west by the 1840s, under very 
cruel conditions and with massive losses of life along the way.
Regions and Architecture. Ohio’s early settlement histories have left 
distinct cultural and architectural identities in different regions of 
the state: Marietta and southeast Ohio from its New Englanders, 
and Chillicothe, Cincinnati, and southwest Ohio from its Virgin-
ians. (Northeast Ohio was an outpost of Connecticut.) Lancaster 
and Somerset’s distinctive town squares mark a Pennsylvania influ-
ence across the east-­central part of the state, as do the large bank 
barns—­built into slopes for ground entry on two levels. The earli-
est surviving house type, of course, is the log cabin; many survive, 
though some are now siding-­clad but still recognizable for their 
proportions. More common are the 1800s I-­houses (three to five 
TECUMSEH
The great Shawnee leader was present at the Battle of Fallen Timbers 
and, after watching his older brother die in the fighting, resolved to form 
a new Native confederacy to continue the struggle. He had already gained a 
reputation for leadership in unifying tribal resistance and for bravery in 
battles against the US Army in southern Ohio. After their defeat at Fallen 
Timbers, most other tribal leaders thought their only path to peace was 
to sign the Treaty of Greenville, giving up their southern Ohio lands. But 
Tecumseh refused. With his brother Tenskwatawa, called “The Prophet,” he 
worked  heroically in the early 1800s to persuade the region’s tribes to unite 
and push the settlers back across the Appalachians. But in late 1811, troops 
led by William Henry Harrison destroyed Tecumseh’s base at Prophetstown, 
Indiana, and with it his dream of a united Native resistance. Tecumseh then 
joined English forces in the War of 1812, still trying to turn back the tide of 
settlement, but was killed in the 1813 Battle of the Thames in southern Ontario.


--- PDF PAGE 17 ---

18
19
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
windows wide, two stories high, 
and one room deep), also visi-
ble in old town centers and out 
along the older routes. In larger 
towns like Chillicothe and Lan-
caster, Greek Revival was the 
style of choice for wealthy res-
idents during the height of the 
canal era from the 1820s to ’50s.
Canals and Industries. The ex-
plosion of town populations and commerce got a huge boost after 
1820 with the construction of two canal routes linking the Ohio 
River with Lake Erie—­from where, using New York state’s new Erie 
Canal, Ohio products could much more easily reach coastal mar-
kets. The Miami and Erie Canal connected Cincinnati, via Ham-
ilton and Dayton, up the western part of the state to Toledo. The 
Ohio and Erie Canal connected Portsmouth, via Chillicothe and 
Circleville, to Newark and on to Cleveland. By mid-­century, new 
industries developed, especially iron production in the Hanging 
Rock region of southeast Ohio. Plentiful resources there included 
limestone, coal, and timber for the furnaces. Places named “fur-
nace” dot the region today, notably the restored Buckeye Furnace. 
Ohio’s once-­robust iron industry fed the Union army’s supply 
chains during the Civil War but then gave way to larger operations 
elsewhere. Also by that time, railroads were making the canals ob-
solete, and they were finally decommissioned around 1900.
EARTHWORK ENCOUNTERS
Wonderment and Destruction. Meanwhile, during the tumultuous cen-
tury of war and settlement from 1750 to 1850, the newcomers were 
coming upon the huge, forest-­covered earthworks—­long earthen 
lines, parallel walls, perfect circles and squares, and rimmed hill-
tops. Since the sites’ final use for Hopewell ceremonies more than a 
thousand years before, the combination of erosion and forest depo-
sition had maintained their forms nearly intact. Though many of 
the early settlers were impressed, and a few, like Circleville’s Caleb 
Atwater, set out to study them and advocate for their preservation, 
the rapid growth of towns and the clearing and plowing of agricul-
tural fields began to take a toll. Many of the most magnificent earth-
works were gone by the 1820s. They often stood in ideal spots for 
cities—­high terraces with good river access (like Marietta, Ports-
mouth, or Cincinnati)—­or occupied exceptionally rich farmland. 
Innumerable mounds were also cut down by treasure hunters.
Myths of the Moundbuilders. Tragically, all this destruction co- 
incided with the decades of warfare against the Native inhabitants, and 
their forced Removal. Many of them had regarded the earthworks as 
sacred ancestral places, which they were now forced to abandon. They 
couldn’t (or didn’t) offer any clear explanations of who had built them 
and when, so the newcomers were quick to interpret them according to 
their own ideas. Many were named “forts” for their resemblance (later 
disproven) to defensive walls and moats. More importantly, neither 
the settlers nor most scholars at the time could imagine that they were 
built by Ancestors of the tribal groups in the area. Racism and igno-
rance led many Euro-­Americans to concoct bizarre theories that they 
were built by a long-­lost and unrelated race of “Moundbuilders”—­or 
maybe transplanted Egyptians, or Israelites, or a Welsh tribe, or the  
Vikings. This confusion persisted until the early 1900s, and it even 
continues in some quarters today, as when they are attributed to 
space aliens.
Early Appreciation. The founders of the United States knew and 
admired the earthworks in the Ohio Country. George Washington 
and Thomas Jefferson both argued for their preservation. Jeffer-
son’s Secretary of the Treasury, Albert Gallatin, was an especially 
eager scholar of ancient America, and one of the few at the time 
who rightly attributed them to Native Americans; he expressed 
disgust for people who belittled the achievements of the region’s 
Indigenous peoples. The first systematic description of the major 
earthwork complexes was by Caleb Atwater, who had been ap-
pointed by Jefferson as the postmaster at Circleville—­a town 
which at the time still stood inside its perfect, double-­ringed, 
namesake earthwork. His study, with accompanying plans, was 
published in 1820 by the American Antiquarian Society and re-
ceived praise from Jefferson.
Cincinnati’s Harriet Beecher Stowe House, 
completed in 1833, is a three-­bay example of 
the century’s common I-­house type.


--- PDF PAGE 18 ---

20
21
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
Beginnings of Archaeology. Public interest in the earthworks was 
at its peak by the mid-­1800s, when two citizens of Chillicothe, 
Ephraim G. Squier and Edwin H. Davis set out to survey the earth-
works of the entire Mississippi and Ohio river system. With support 
from Gallatin, their work, Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Val-
ley, became the first publication of the new Smithsonian Institution 
in 1848. Squier and Davis assembled their magisterial volume with 
maps, plates, and descriptive detail amassed from many skilled 
collaborators throughout the state—­still among the best records we 
have for many sites now destroyed. Squier was a newspaper editor, 
and Davis was a physician. The latter profession seems to have lent 
itself to amateur archaeological interests: Charles Metz and Daniel 
Drake, who did pioneering work in the Little Miami Valley and Cin-
cinnati, respectively, were also physicians, as was James Salisbury, 
who with his brother Charles carried out the most accurate survey 
of the Newark Earthworks around 1860.
Scientific Archaeology. Modern archaeological methods began in 
Ohio with Frederic Ward Putnam’s work in the 1880s and ’90s, at 
sites in the southwestern part of the state—­notably Serpent Mound, 
which he helped save from destruction, and the Turner and Foster 
sites along the Little Miami. A professor at Harvard University, Put-
nam is now generally known as the “father” of American archae-
ology. He collaborated with a local enthusiast named Warren King 
Moorehead, who investigated thoroughly at Fort Ancient and suc-
cessfully lobbied the Ohio legislature for its preservation. Moore-
head also worked (for Putnam) at the Hopewell Mound Group, 
where his crew found the huge quantities of culture-­defining art-
istry that astonished visitors to the 1893 World’s Columbian Ex-
position in Chicago. Well into the 1900s, more systematic mound 
excavations, especially at the Seip Earthworks and Mound City, 
yielded more and better knowledge about the culture—­but also de-
stroyed the mounds, only a few of which were restored afterward. 
Sadly, this work also destroyed the Ancestors’ resting places.
STEWARDSHIP AND SIGNIFICANCE
Management and Research. The Ohio History Connection, the Na-
tional Park Service, and other park systems and agencies manage 
the major sites today, so their preservation, access, and skilled 
maintenance are assured. Yet many other sites are still in private 
hands, threatened by modern development (and not mentioned 
in this book). Meanwhile, two new focus areas are transforming 
twenty-­first-­century archaeology. One is remote sensing technol-
ogy such as magnetometry that can show certain features under 
the ground without digging—­for example, precise earthwork out-
lines or the most promising locations for targeted excavation. The 
other is the search for often-­elusive domestic areas in the spaces 
outside the ceremonial earthworks, where more evidence of the 
people’s everyday lives, social relationships, population levels, and 
food ways might be found.
American Indian Involvement. 
Since the 1990 passage of the Na-
tive American Graves Protection 
and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), 
site managers and interpreters 
have been expanding their col-
laborations with tribal leaders 
and Indigenous scholars. The 
preparations for World Heritage 
inscription (beginning in 2008), 
and most efforts since, have seen 
significant Indigenous participa-
tion. The sites’ management agencies, university centers and depart-
ments, the state’s government, and others now collaborate through 
many programs and opportunities with Ohio’s long-­displaced Tribal 
Nations as they reconnect with their Ohio homelands. Such renewed 
Indigenous leadership in telling their histories and interpreting their 
cultures is showcased well, for example, at the Great Council State 
Park.
The Question of Artifacts. Since 2022, artifacts uncovered by a cen-
tury and a half of excavations have been withdrawn from view 
in most museums because according to many Indigenous beliefs 
they are regarded as sacred—­even powerful beings—­buried by the 
Ancestors for a reason and not meant to be seen again. Many of 
Jarrod Burks, of the Heartland Earth-
works Conservancy, runs a multi-­
head magnetometry rig at the Hahn 
Village site near Newtown in 2015.


--- PDF PAGE 19 ---

22
23
The Region and Its History
The Region and Its History
these pieces have become iconic symbols of the Hopewell culture—­
especially the animal figure platform pipes and the mica hand. But 
out of respect for the ongoing consultation process on this ques-
tion, no images of ancient objects appear in this book, except in 
artistic abstractions which are not generally considered to capture 
their power.
World Heritage Criteria. The 2023 World Heritage inscription of 
the eight Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks is based on what  
UNESCO calls their “Outstanding Universal Value” to all of human-
ity. This group of sites meets two criteria specified by the World Her-
itage program: They give testimony to a distinctive culture (criterion 
iii), and to their builders’ creative genius (criterion i). The unique 
culture story here is that a society dispersed among small settle-
ments and organized without rigid hierarchies exerted continent-­
wide influence and created such monumental public works. The 
unique genius story here is that these works exhibit an astonishing 
scale, precision, and detail in their geometric layouts, and in their  
multiple alignments to the Moon’s positions during its complex 
18.6-­year cycle.
Earth, Art, and Culture. Across global cultures, earthworks are a 
unique and profound form of architecture. Forming the Earth into 
an ordered, sculpted artifice, usually at a huge scale, always evokes 
powerful ideas. Consider the great gardens of Renaissance Eu-
rope or Imperial China—­or our own massive interstate highway 
embankments. Each rearrangement of the earth’s surface reveals 
profoundly what a human society believes and values. Experienc-
ing Ohio’s earthworks can help remind us how designed landscapes 
convey a unique aesthetic and poetic power—­both for their huge 
scale and for their use of the Earth itself as a material. Artists like 
Robert Smithson and Michael Heizer, or landscape architects like 
George Hargreaves (who designed the University of Cincinnati’s 
earthwork-­laced campus) understand fully that artistry with the 
Earth has a special kind of beauty and significance.
Find that beauty and significance among the hills and valleys of 
southern Ohio, while touring the monuments of one of the world’s 
most brilliant Indigenous civilizations.
RETURNING TO THE MOUNDS
Across the thirteen moons on Turtle’s back, across multiples of centuries, the 
Mother Mounds are calling to their children: “Come home . . .” They call, sing, 
coo, echo, hum. They infiltrate our sleeping and our waking dreams with 
whispers of thoughts they make as if our very own: “Come home . . . it’s time. 
Come home to rest your hearts in the layered folds of Mother’s skirts.”
—­Monique Mojica, Founding Member of Native Earth Performing
Arts, Toronto (Guna and Rappahannock Nations, Canada)
At the University of Cincinnati, students walk among a series of winding earthworks and 
massive mounds designed in the 1990s by landscape architect George Hargreaves.


--- PDF PAGE 20 ---

25
World Heritage Route
24
2
World Heritage Route
West
The World Heritage Route connects Ohio’s most important ancient 
earthwork sites inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 
2023. Anchored by several historic towns, it links to seven branch 
routes for exploring the rest of the region. The western half pres-
ents a cross section of Ohio’s geological history, while the eastern 
half approximates an ancient roadway that connected Chillicothe 
and Newark—­the Hopewell culture’s two richest ceremonial 
centers.
LEBANON
With several historic districts, Ohio’s oldest inn, a fine museum, and 
a vibrant downtown, Lebanon makes a pleasant and convenient 
hub for exploring the Miami Valley region and southwest Ohio.
Historic Center. Downtown Lebanon is anchored by the legendary 
Golden Lamb Inn (27 South Broadway St.), Ohio’s oldest continu-
ously operating business. Its eighteen guest rooms tell many stories, 
having hosted several US pres-
idents and other distinguished 
guests. 
Along 
well-­preserved, 
tree-­lined downtown streets are 
many cafés, antique and spe-
cialty shops, and other amenities, 
and the adjacent historic neigh-
borhoods 
present 
beautifully 
restored houses from various pe-
riods. On weekends, the Lebanon 
Mason Monroe Railroad offers 
scenic tours embarking from the 
nearby station. For information 
on accommodations and other 
unique points of interest in Lebanon and Warren County, visit  
Warren County’s official tourism website, under the banner Ohio’s 
Largest Playground.
Harmon Museum. Across from the Golden Lamb stands the large and 
impressive museum of the Warren County Historical Society (105 
South Broadway St.), housed in the historic Harmon Hall and a large 
addition. Exhibits tell engaging stories of this area’s antiquity, early 
history, and national importance. The museum’s collection of Shaker 
archives and artifacts is the finest in the Midwest (one of the sect’s 
The figure of a lamb graces the lobby of the Golden Lamb Inn, which dates from 1803 
and anchors Lebanon’s historic downtown.


--- PDF PAGE 21 ---

26
27
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: WEST
largest settlements, Union Village, was founded nearby in 1805), while 
textile and Indigenous artifact collections are also quite extraordinary. 
The facility encompasses four art galleries, a research library, and a 
recreated town square with period commerce, including an intriguing 
daguerreotype exhibit. A 1795 log cabin, one of southern Ohio’s oldest 
settlement structures, is preserved on the grounds. The Harmon Mu-
seum also boasts the Armstrong Gallery of Flight, dedicated to Neil 
Armstrong (who lived in Lebanon as an adult) and designated as a stop 
on the National Park Service’s Aviation Trail.
FORT ANCIENT ACCESS ROUTES
Two I-­71 interchanges near Lebanon are signposted for Fort Ancient. Exit 32 leads to the 
more scenic approach, via State Route 123 from the west, although a steep hairpin turn 
into the Little Miami gorge makes it impassable for large vehicles or trailers. The route 
from Exit 36 approaches instead from the north and east on level ground. Both enter 
the site on State Route 350 through impressive gateway openings in the earthen wall.  
The latter also passes between Fort Ancient’s Twin Mounds.
FORT ANCIENT EARTHWORKS
Set high above a narrow gorge of the Little Miami River, the most 
spectacular and well preserved of the Hopewell-­era hilltop enclo-
sures encircles over 100 acres with its earthen walls and ponds.
Orientation. The earthen walls, the museum, and the site entrance 
are all prominent from the highway entrance (6123 SR 350, Oregonia). 
Opening times vary seasonally and admission is charged; details are 
on the Ohio History Connection website. A walking tour of the site’s 
most outstanding features will take two to four hours. In its forested 
setting, the undulating earthen forms present themselves best from 
October through April and preferably in sunlight. The enclosure has 
three parts: the roughly triangular South Fort, the narrow isthmus of 
the Middle Fort, and the larger North Fort where the museum and 
parking lot are located. Except to the northeast, the walls follow the 
rims of steep, wooded hillsides, accompanied by constructed ponds 
along their interiors. The walls are most visible in the Middle Fort, 
and most spectacular at the site’s three major gateways—­especially 
the remote South Gate.
History. The Hopewell-­era walls were built in two or three phases, 
generally from south to north, and then largely disused until a later 
Indigenous culture (from about 1150) built a substantial village in the 
South Fort. Around 1800, the first settlers began turning Fort Ancient 
into a tourist attraction and brought the new Lebanon-­Chillicothe 
Turnpike (now State Route 350) through the site. A Philadelphia peri-
odical published a description in 1809, and it appeared again in Caleb 
Atwater’s 1820 report. Later in the century, a railway stop and hotel 
were built at the bottom of the hill, beside the river. The preserva-
tion of Fort Ancient was assured in 1891, after archaeologist Warren 
King Moorehead convinced the Ohio legislature to make it a state 
memorial. But it has seen many uses. For example, troops in training 
for World War I practiced “storming the walls”—­probably the near-
est it ever came to being a real fort. Although the astonished early 
settlers could only assume it was built for defense, we now recog-
nize that no effective fortification ever had eighty-­four openings or 
its moat on the inside. Like the other Hopewell hilltop enclosures, 
it was a place of special ceremony, its elevated position perhaps con-
necting it with the Sky World.
Several of Fort Ancient’s most dramatic wall formations are visible in the narrow Middle 
Fort, where the gateways between them open to steep, plunging ravines.
A digital restoration helps 
to envision Fort Ancient as 
it may have been conceived 
by its makers and while the 
forests were kept cleared.  
Its walls and ponds encircle 
two hilltops high above the 
Little Miami River. (Link to 
animation is on page 205.)


--- PDF PAGE 22 ---

29
World Heritage Route: WEST
1 Museum and Garden. The Ohio History Connection’s museum, 
near the parking area, offers site orientation, a small shop,  
restrooms, and meeting spaces. The extensive exhibits present the 
history of American Indians in Ohio from their earliest postglacial 
arrival; through the Adena, Hopewell, and Fort Ancient cultures; 
to nineteenth-­century Euro-­American settlement and the resulting 
conflicts, including the tragedy of Indian Removal. A fenced gar-
den and reconstructed Hopewell-­era house help visitors envision 
everyday life for the earthwork builders. Its design is based on one 
of several posthole patterns found during the 1997 museum expan-
sion; those houses predated the enclosing of the North Fort. Re-
mains of houses and craft workshops indicate that people also lived 
farther out to the northeast.
2 North Gate and Twin Mounds. From the parking lot, a paved lane 
passes through the twenty-­three-­foot-­high eastern walls of the 
North Fort. This is the only part of the perimeter where the sur-
rounding terrain is generally level, and the only place where the 
builders created their water features outside the walls rather than 
on the interior. Out here, the large Twin Mounds frame the ancient 
approach to the North Gate; today it seems natural to assume that 
was the highway opening, but in antiquity the axis defined by these 
The identical Twin Mounds stand outside the North Fort and frame the modern highway 
approaching from the east.


--- PDF PAGE 23 ---

30
31
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
mounds directed people instead to the first opening south of the 
road. The Twin Mounds are spatial markers, not burial mounds, 
and are a variation on the earthwork’s two older major gateways 
which are formed by mound-­like rises atop the walls themselves.
Parallel Walls. Beyond the Twin Mounds, parallel walls once 
headed out to the northeast for about a quarter of a mile. Culti-
vation had left them difficult to trace by the 1840s. They followed 
the highest elevation of the plateau, between the headwaters of the 
two streams, to where a small mound once stood just beyond Mid-
dleboro Road. In an area near the walls, buried piles of obsidian, 
flint, and copper suggest that artisans were crafting objects for use 
in the ceremonies. Archaeologist Patricia Essenpreis discovered in 
1990 that from each of the Twin Mounds, the people also dug deep 
trenches out toward the nearby streams. These trenches carried 
spring water down to those streams which, by flowing into the river 
below, completed a watery perimeter for the entire site.
3 Foursquare Mounds. Inside the North Fort, the level space is 
punctuated by four low, limestone-­covered mounds. They form 
a square averaging 520 feet on each side—­about one-­half of an 
often-­used Hopewell dimension of 1,054 feet (called the “OCD,” and  
explained on pages 95–96). One mound stands near the parking 
lot, another just inside the North Gate, and another across the  
highway. Completing the square is a final mound near the site 
caretaker’s house. The stone in their original coverings showed  
evidence of burning—­it was oxidized, red, and crumbly, and its  
fossils had turned white. Apparently, huge fires burned dramati-
cally atop these four stone-­surfaced mounds. The square space they  
define seems to have been kept clean and free of buildings, suggest-
ing it was sacred. The current stone caps on the mounds protect the 
originals beneath.
Alignments. Two of the square’s mounds are backsights for astronom-
ical alignments. The northwest one aligns through one of the eastern 
gateways with the winter solstice sunrise. From the southwest mound, 
alignments through three gateways align with the northernmost ris-
ing positions of the Sun (summer solstice) and Moon (both its min-
imum and maximum; see page 92). Trees would have been cleared 
to allow open views from the mound to these three key astronomical 
alignments, through the gateways 
and out to the northeastern horizon. 
Today, the solstice gateway opening 
(just north of the highway) and the 
woods beyond it are kept clear to 
allow for special sunrise-­watching 
celebrations held here every June 21.
4 Moorehead Circle. The biggest discovery at Fort Ancient in recent 
memory is the evidence of a giant, ceremonial woodhenge (ring of 
timber poles) in the North Fort, now called the Moorehead Circle. 
A magnetometry survey first brought it to light in 2005, and investi-
gations followed over several summers by teams from Wright State 
University led by archaeologist Bob Riordan. Rings of posts about 200 
feet in diameter encircled an area which had been partly built up and 
leveled (toward the ravine to the north); fitted with alternating strips 
of stone and gravel; and centered on a large deposit of bright, red-­
orange, burned soil brought in from elsewhere. This red central fea-
ture aligns across the nearest mound of the Foursquare to the gateway 
marking the summer solstice sunrise. Despite its many unanswered 
questions, the Moorehead Circle has confirmed that the earthwork’s 
interior was the setting for elaborate ritual facilities.
5 Middle Fort. To build the walls, people scraped up much of the 
topsoil from the level interior of the North Fort. Today, standing 
water is common and mowing is difficult during wet seasons. Mov-
ing down the road along Fort Ancient’s spine, the walls begin to 
close in on both sides, transitioning to the narrow Middle Fort, 
where their undulating beauty and variety become more evident. 
On the left are three flush-­laid stone circles, just before the road 
passes between two crescent mounds. Nearby, also on the left, are 
some of the site’s most dramatic ponds. The archaeologist Bob Con-
nolly found evidence that the isthmus—­from the crescents to the 
Great Gateway—­was substantially constructed to connect the two 
large plateaus. They filled in three gullies to accomplish this, using 
an amount of soil equal to all of the site’s earthen walls combined.
In the early 2000s, archaeologists uncovered a 
startling deposit of bright, red-­orange, sterile soil 
at the center of the Moorehead Circle.


--- PDF PAGE 24 ---

32
33
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: WEST
Construction. To create Fort Ancient, generations of people must 
have worked consistently toward a common goal—­a shared concep-
tion of the site’s design, purpose, and meaning. The first step would 
have been clearing the forests—­by itself a huge undertaking with 
the techniques and tools available (girdling, fire, stone axes). They 
scraped soil off the surface and moved it, one basket load at a time, 
to fill ravines and form the eighty-­four walls and gateways. They 
dug 131 ponds and lined them with clay and stone. They carried vast 
amounts of limestone up from the valley to reinforce the walls and 
gateways, to create stone rings and circles, and to build long runs of 
pavement. They also covered much of the outside wall surfaces with 
stone; when freshly built it may have gleamed in the sunlight.
6 Ponds. Fort Ancient was designed not only with Earth but with 
water. The walls can effectively enclose the space, but the builders 
also worked very hard to make water part of this boundary. When 
filled with rainwater or snowmelt, clay-­lined ditches became a nearly 
continuous necklace of reflective ponds—­perhaps to evoke views 
or entries into the watery Beneath World known from Indigenous 
traditions. Several still function well, presenting the constructed 
earthworks as if they are floating on the water. Even when dry, their 
positions and scope are apparent. (The largest of Fort Ancient’s sur-
viving ponds is in the northwest corner, but is not easily reached.)
7 Great Gateway. The most elaborate of the site’s three major pas-
sages is called the Great Gateway. Approaching from the Middle 
Fort, the road rises across the narrow constructed isthmus to the 
original north entrance to the South Fort, the oldest part of Fort 
Ancient. Beneath the ramp descending into the South Fort’s inte-
rior, archaeologist Warren King Moorehead found many ancient 
graves. Though this would seem disrespectful, Pokagon Band of 
Potawatomi citizen John Low tells of “a common saying I have 
Beautiful crescent mounds 
help form the passage 
through the Middle Fort,  
now framing the modern 
road as it approaches the 
Great Gateway.
Despite the 1930s efforts to drain them, many of Fort Ancient’s ponds still hold water in wet 
seasons, most visibly along the eastern side of the Middle Fort.
THE WATERY BENEATH WORLD
In wet seasons, when Fort Ancient’s ponds fill with water, they become 
reflecting pools, presenting a beautiful unity of the three levels of the 
Universe as it is understood in much of Woodland Indigenous cosmology. 
As we look down into the water, we see reflected the earthwork and the Sky 
beyond. There, all at once, are the Sky World, the home of the Sun and the 
Thunderbirds; the Earth World, brought into being for us to live on; and the 
watery Beneath World, from which the Earth and all creation were brought 
forth, and which is presided over by the Great Serpent and the Underwater 
Panther. The earthwork appears to rise from the water or to float on it, as 
in the many tribal versions of the Earth Diver creation story in which an 
animal brings up a bit of mud from beneath the water which then grows to 
become the habitable Earth.


--- PDF PAGE 25 ---

34
35
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
heard all my life, that ‘We walk on the bones of our Ancestors’ to 
solemnize our connections to the ones who came before us, as well 
as to demonstrate our intimate connection to the land.” Just inside 
the Great Gateway, a small stone mound stands on the right; nearby 
was a long stretch of stone pavement (no longer visible). The mod-
ern picnic area now occupies the northeastern part of the South 
Fort, with a stone and timber picnic shelter built by Civilian Con-
servation Corps crews in the 1930s.
8 Village Site. The western arm of the South Fort was the primary 
occupation area for later societies who lived here. At least off and 
on between 1100 and 1550, a village stood here with a wooden 
stockade around it. These later people also had settlements down 
in the valley, but they had gone before the first Euro-­American set-
tlers arrived. According to the archaeologists’ tradition of naming a  
distinctive culture after the place where they first identify its key 
features, these later populations have been dubbed the “Fort An-
cient” culture—­to no end of confusion, as they did not build the 
Fort Ancient earthworks. They lived quite differently from the 
Hopewell-­era earthwork builders, gathering in substantial set-
tlements like SunWatch Village (see page 114), and growing large 
quantities of corn.
9 North Overlook. From the picnic area, follow the road to the 
right to reach the North Overlook, where a wooden platform atop 
the walls offers views of the Little Miami River and its narrow 
gorge. The vista highlights the special prominence of this location, 
and the importance of creating an elevated ceremonial place with 
such a strong visual tie to the river below. From here, a path with 
many stairs leads all the way down to the river and the Little Miami  
Scenic Trail alongside it today. Or, the Terrace Trail descends part-
way down the slope to a series of large, ancient cuts in the hillside 
(and abundant April wildflowers), then continues around to the 
South Overlook.
⓾ South Overlook. Another perimeter trail, the Earthworks Trail, 
leaves the North Overlook to follow the interior of the South Fort’s 
western and southern enclosure walls, passing down through two of 
the site’s deepest ravines. The ancient walls were built across these 
ravines, creating what must have been Fort Ancient’s largest and 
deepest ponds, albeit more prone to erosion. Returning to the large 
clearing, and along the southern wall, another wooden platform—­
the South Overlook—­offers more views of the forested valley.
⓫ South Gate. Near the South Overlook, a trail heads east into the 
woods to Fort Ancient’s most spectacular feature, the grand South 
Gate. Like the site’s two other major gateways, a pair of mounds 
define an entrance passage. Like the Great Gateway, they stand 
atop the wall, though here on a more massive scale. From the in-
terior, a ramp passes between what were once ponds, and up to 
the notch between the mounds. This is the site’s original monu-
mental threshold, and suggests an elaborate ritual passage: After a 
long journey, celebrants arrived on the river by canoe, climbed the 
stone path up the steep hillside, and entered the enclosure—­over 
The North Overlook, with  
its views over the Little Miami 
River gorge, was a favorite  
of the site’s hundreds of  
thousands of early-­1900s 
visitors.
The South Gate’s two large mounds stand nineteen feet high; they frame the terminus of a 
steep stone path rising from the river below, creating a dramatic passage into the enclosure.


--- PDF PAGE 26 ---

36
37
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
the wall, between the mounds, down the ramp, across the water, 
and into the sacred space of the interior. Today, the dense forest 
canopy at this corner of the site gives the South Gate area a mood 
of quiet grandeur. For summer visitors, the walls and mounds here 
are among the few features of the enclosure’s architecture that are 
clearly visible, relatively free of intruding seasonal undergrowth.
EN ROUTE TO THE PAINT VALLEY
From Fort Ancient to the Appalachian foothills, State Route 350 crosses a broad stretch 
of gently rolling farmland with few earthwork remains. This area was in between the 
major Ohio Hopewell regions of the Miami Valley (upstream from Cincinnati) and the 
Scioto River–­Paint Creek confluence around Chillicothe. Early settlers’ villages like 
Clarksville and Leesburg were founded soon after the American Revolution by Quakers 
from the South who objected to the continuation of slavery.
Virginia Military District. The lands between the Little Miami and the 
Scioto Rivers were Shawnee territory when settlement began. And 
yet they were surveyed, divided into parcels, and given by the new 
United States government to veterans of the Revolutionary War. 
The land was offered in lieu of cash payments, which the fledgling 
federal treasury could not afford. Surveyors used the traditional 
Virginia method of “metes and bounds” which set boundaries ac-
cording to various natural features (in contrast to the grid method 
used by the founders of Marietta). Today’s roadmaps display the 
peculiar geometries that resulted. Many of the town and county 
names also reflect the new arrivals’ Virginia roots. As the settler 
economy grew, many recipients of these original parcels became 
quite wealthy.
New Vienna. This small town clusters around the angular meeting 
point of three of those irregular early roads and retains a good 
number of historic houses. The town was laid out in 1827 and first 
called “Buzzard’s Glory” after the birds who flocked to the drying 
hides at a local tannery—­one of the essential early industries in 
most of these fast-­growing, early nineteenth-­century agricultural 
settlements. Just east and south of New Vienna is the high, glacial-­
till-­covered divide where waters flow either west into the Little 
Miami watershed, or east into the hillier terrain of the Paint and 
Scioto country.
TO THE BRUSH CREEK ROUTE
State Route 73 heads south out of New Vienna to Hillsboro, with some fine historic 
buildings, then on to the Great Serpent Mound in northern Adams County. Farther 
south are several biodiverse nature preserves. Return to the World Heritage Route via 
Sinking Spring, the beautifully intact hilltop enclosure of Fort Hill, and the Highlands 
Nature Sanctuary near Bainbridge (see map, page 133).
Greenfield. Founded on the banks of Paint Creek in 1799, Greenfield’s 
name evokes the beautiful rural countryside, where the larger hills 
foreshadowing the Appalachian Plateau just begin to rise. Many of 
the early settlers here and in nearby towns were motivated by their 
opposition to slavery, and the town became an important stop on the 
Underground Railroad in the early 1800s. A century later, it was a place 
of industrial innovation—­including the first African American-­owned 
vehicle manufacturer, the C.R. Patterson and Sons company. Green-
field’s first stone building was the 1812 Travellers Rest Inn, which also 
served as the town’s first post office. Relocated from its original site, it 
is now a museum and headquarters of the local historical society (set 
back from the corner of Jefferson 
Street and South McArthur Way).
ANCIENT ARTISTRY
Walking inside the Fort Ancient and Newark earthworks . . . one is confounded 
by a multiplicity of sensations: that here are the greatest works of art on the 
American continent . . . ; that here in the seductive Ohio Valley are perhaps 
the greatest art monuments in the world.
—­Barnett Newman, American abstract expressionist painter
(1905–­1970)
Greenfield’s 1812 Travellers Rest Inn 
is now a house museum overlooking 
a cemetery and Paint Creek.


--- PDF PAGE 27 ---

38
39
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
PAINT CREEK STATE PARK
After Greenfield, the route enters increasingly scenic terrain en route to Bainbridge, 
either via State Route 41, or by taking Rapid Forge Road out of town and skirting the 
edge of Paint Creek State Park, which offers a wildlife area, clear streams, mature 
woodlands, hiking and biking trails, and a 1,148-­acre lake with recreational facilities 
and camping. From near US Route 50, Falls Road follows directly along the river into 
Bainbridge.
Bainbridge. Virginia surveyor Nathaniel Massie founded Bain-
bridge in 1805, after establishing Chillicothe nine years earlier. 
Massie helped to attract many of the area’s early settlers and be-
came a wealthy landowner and political figure during the early 
years of Ohio statehood. Bainbridge may be best known today as 
“the cradle of American dentistry,” since a local dentist opened the 
first dental school in the US here in 1825. At the Dr. John Harris 
Dental Museum, on West Main Street, the often frightening imple-
ments of tooth extraction (and other things for which dentists were 
then relied upon) are displayed.
The Paint Valley. Bainbridge marks the western end of the beau-
tiful Paint Valley, its rich, secluded farmland fully enclosed by 
high, wooded hillsides and a few striking cliffs. In antiquity, this 
valley held an especially dense concentration of geometric earth-
works, including Seip (pronounced SIPE) and Baum, with Spruce 
Hill commanding views high above its eastern end. Nearby along 
Paint Creek’s North Fork lies the spectacular Hopewell Mound 
Group (reached via Maple Grove Road). At the valley’s eastern end, 
Canoe and kayak liveries along Paint Creek  
offer visitors an opportunity to travel  
this “Valley of the Ancients” by water as  
the earthwork builders did.
SHAWNEE LAND
At the onset of Euro-­American settlement, much of southern and south-
western Ohio was the home of the Shawnee Tribe. When the settlers began 
carving new trails through the forests and establishing their farms and 
villages, the land belonged to Indigenous people who had arrived here 
at least two centuries before—­already driven from their homes farther 
east and south by colonial expansion. The ensuing conflicts, in which the 
Shawnee, Miami, and other tribes were fighting not only for their lands, 
but for their entire way of life, ultimately ended with their forced Removal 
to Oklahoma and other states by the 1840s. Local lore has it that the Paint 
Valley’s red ocher had been used by the Indigenous people for their 
symbolic body and face markings, and that the settlers found it to be a 
substitute for paint and used it on their barns and other buildings. Either 
may help explain the origins of the stream’s name.
SHAWNEE REMOVAL
Chief Glenna Wallace of the Eastern Shawnee Tribe 
of Oklahoma tells the tragic story of her people’s 
forced Removal from Ohio: We, my people, walked 
on foot. They refused to go by river craft. They 
were afraid of the river craft. They were afraid that 
diseased blankets might be given to them. They 
were afraid the river craft might catch on fire. And 
so they said, “We will leave Ohio exactly as we came to Ohio.” And that was on 
foot, and that was on horseback, and of course there would have been some 
wagons. And that’s a journey of about 700 miles. About 30 percent of our 
people died along the way. Each tribe has its own Trail of Tears, even though 
that term may not have been named until later and is usually associated 
with the Cherokee. And that trail of tears didn’t necessarily end whenever 
we arrived at the place where we were supposed to go, because just before 
1900, my tribe was down to the number of sixty-­nine people. So, it truly was 
an example of almost total genocide. (Link to video is on page 205.)


--- PDF PAGE 28 ---

40
41
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
shapes, otherwise mostly degraded by decades of agriculture. 
They include a smaller circle, a square, and a small ellipse. Mowed 
trails follow the square’s perimeter and connect its southwestern 
corner with a wooden platform near the riverbank
History. A community of perhaps 200 people used this earthwork 
enclosure over several generations as a civic and ceremonial cen-
ter. Over time they erected two great three-­chambered halls, sev-
eral specialized buildings, and the huge Earth-­walled enclosure. 
The three-­part geometric layout suggests affinities among the com-
munities at Seip and at four other similar geometric earthworks 
nearby. After about 400 CE, the forest reclaimed the site. After set-
tlement, the land was farmed for generations before being studied 
or preserved. Through a combination of bequests and purchases, 
the central portions of the earthworks came under the control of 
the Ohio History Connection, which led excavations of the two 
large mounds in the early 1900s and faithfully restored the larger 
one. The remaining portions joined Hopewell Culture National 
Historical Park when it was founded in 1992.
a tight passage (at Slate Mills) takes the highway into Chillicothe.  
The creek—­really a small river—­is popular with paddlers, meander-
ing through the valley before entering an otherwise inaccessible 
canyon on its way to joining the Scioto River below Chillicothe.
SEIP EARTHWORKS.
Three huge, perfect geometric figures combine to enclose eighty-­
nine acres—­one of five earthwork complexes built in Ross County 
using the same shapes. Two large burial mounds at Seip contained 
some of the Hopewell culture’s finest ceremonial artistry.
Orientation. Three miles east of Bainbridge along US Route 50 (7058 
US 50 Scenic, Bainbridge), a cluster of large trees marks a small 
parking area for the earthworks, now a unit of Hopewell Culture  
National Historical Park. The site is open during daylight hours with 
no admission charge, and visibility is good any time of day or year. 
The scene is dominated by the large restored mound in its serene 
valley setting, approached from the parking area through a peace-
ful grove of trees. Restored walls of the large circle frame a small 
gateway; visible traces of the wall extend toward the small brick 
house to the left. The National Park Service maintains a planting 
program to help visitors trace the remainder of the huge geometric 
The Seip Earthworks are centered on the large Seip-­Pricer Mound, seen here from a restored 
section of the large circle’s northern rim.


--- PDF PAGE 29 ---

42
43
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
3 Craft Buildings. In the 1960s and 1970s, Ohio History Connection 
archaeologists Raymond Baby (pronounced BAH-­bee) and Martha 
Otto conducted one of the first non-­mound investigations at any 
Hopewell earthwork. They uncovered the floors and posthole pat-
terns of a complex of buildings north of the Seip-­Pricer Mound. 
These were not dwellings or ceremonial spaces, but special pur-
pose buildings, possibly craft workshops. Markings on the site 
today outline their floor plans, which echo the distinctive Hopewell 
building shape found at other sites—­rectangles with rounded cor-
ners and double rows of poles along the longer sides.
The posthole pattern found beneath the Seip-­Pricer Mound was similar to this one  
uncovered in the 1970s at the Liberty Earthworks south of Chillicothe.
1 Thomas Blackstone House. From the parking area, the immensity 
of the three-­part geometric enclosure is not yet apparent, though 
the large Seip-­Pricer Mound is visible in the distance. Several de-
cades of farming had begun to degrade the walls before Thomas 
Blackstone built a small brick house in the 1850s. It sits directly 
on a portion of the large circle and served for a time as a school. 
This structure and its two outbuildings remind us that from the 
earliest decades of settlement, most newcomers thought of these 
little-­understood mound and earthwork complexes as merely farm-
land—­to be cleared of trees, plowed, and planted, year after year.
2 Large Circle Gateway. Seip’s three major geometric shapes can 
begin to be envisioned from a small opening in the northern rim of 
the larger circle. The smaller circle is to the right, and the square is 
in the far-­left distance behind the large mound. Analysis of LiDAR 
(light detection and ranging) and magnetometry images show the 
square’s sides to approximate the Hopewell standard dimension  
of 1,054 feet. The large circle’s diameter is 1.5 times this length. 
The center points of the three large figures are connected by an 
obtuse angle that is exactly bisected by the center line of the major 
northeastern reentrant gateway (indicated on the site map shown 
on page 41). All this points to the sophistication of the builders’ con-
trol over geometric construction at a huge scale and at distances 
separated by many miles.
Tripartite Earthworks. Seip’s three large shapes very closely match 
those built at four other earthworks within twenty miles. Huge, 
precise circles and squares were used throughout the Hopewell 
world, but this set shows the ancient architects at their most ad-
vanced. Though laid out in various arrangements, all included 
sixteen-­acre circles, twenty-­seven-­acre squares, and forty-­seven-­
acre larger circles. Their builders obviously had well-­refined 
techniques of measurement, layout, and execution. Of the five, 
Liberty, Frankfort, and Works East are gone, but Baum’s scant re-
mains lie just a few miles down the valley near where it appears 
to close at the base of Spruce Hill. Not visible on the ground today, 
and not extensively studied, it remains on private land. The Seip-­
Baum pair prompt us to wonder at the placement of two such sim-
ilar complexes literally within sight of each other in this beautiful 
valley.
Five earthwork complexes in Ross County had three nearly identical geometric elements, 
with matching areas, but in each case combined differently.


--- PDF PAGE 30 ---

44
45
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
ceremonies probably took place here—­ritual burning and burial 
certainly among them. Most people buried on the building’s floor 
were cremated first, but among the few to be laid out unburned 
were four young adults and two infants, placed together in a large 
common tomb and surrounded 
by thousands of freshwater 
pearls. Layered above them 
were the five large pipes from 
Tennessee, and a wide fabric 
canopy pegged down with deer 
bone skewers.
5 Seip Conjoined Mound. The unrestored remains of another large 
mound, also excavated in the 1930s, lie to the northeast of the Seip-­
Pricer Mound. Its form combined three lobes, each correspond-
ing to one of the interconnected rooms of a large timber-­framed 
building. Here, archaeologists found more graves and artifacts, 
some of them similar to those from the larger mound. The tallest 
of the mound’s three sections stood thirty-­two feet tall and had a 
stone staircase climbing to its summit. Beyond the remains of the 
mound, to the northeast, the National Park’s mowing pattern out-
lines the large circle’s distinctive reentrant gateway.
NATIVE CEREMONY
At the core of American Indian cultural values is the understanding that all 
things—­humans, animals, plants, rocks, water, air—­are living, are connected, 
and deserve respect. Everyday tasks are marked by honor and appreciation, 
reflected in ceremonies. Ceremonies are also acts of healing, and therefore 
“medicine” in Native traditions that continue to the present-­day—­healing 
our minds, and maintaining strength in our bodies, our families, and our 
communities. Ceremonies instruct us on ways for living a good life, and 
maintaining harmonious relationships with other people and the natural world. 
The legacy of the Hopewell tradition shows the importance of ceremonial life 
in all things—­extravagance in material artistry, precision in earthwork design, 
and elaboration in the rituals of death and burial. Marking the paths of the 
Sun and Moon, the earthworks determined the times for ceremonies, when, as 
still today in Native communities, large gatherings occurred in public spaces, 
accompanied by feasting, gifting, dancing, and ceremonial games.
—­Marti L. Chaatsmith, Associate Director of the Newark Earthworks
Center at The Ohio State University (Comanche, Choctaw)
4 Seip-­Pricer Mound. The focal point of the site today is the second-­
largest mound ever built by the Hopewell culture. Excavations here 
in the 1920s and ’30s uncovered some of the people’s most beau-
tiful, distinctive artistry—­a clay head, a tortoiseshell swan, and 
copper plaques with remnants of fabric still clinging to them. The 
cloth fibers (also fur and feathers) survived nearly two millennia 
underground through the effect of the copper salts. Five large effigy 
smoking pipes were laid down on one layer of the mound, likely 
imported from Tennessee. This ceremonial artistry was found 
among graves, fire basins, and deposits on the floor of what had 
been a large, timber-­framed, three-­chambered building. They took 
down the building and then built up, in layers, the mound’s final 
form—­30 feet high and 240 feet long, capping and encircling it with 
large stones to deter erosion.
Timber Temples. The grand wood-­framed structure whose remains 
were buried under the mound was 113 feet long, precise and sym-
metrical in its gridded layout, and nearly identical to another at the 
Liberty Earthworks, nearby in the Scioto Valley. Many activities and 
Domestic life took place in spacious interi-
ors with benches and hearths, while many 
other daily activities happened outdoors. 
(Link to animation is on page 205.)
The National Park Service’s landscape plan clearly outlines the Seip Earthworks’ small  
ellipse, shown here with September’s goldenrod in bloom.


--- PDF PAGE 31 ---

46
47
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: WEST
EN ROUTE TO CHILLICOTHE
US Route 50 winds through this scenic valley and the nearby village of Bourneville 
where, at the east edge of town, stands one of the route’s several stately Virginia-­style 
mansions. The forms and proportions of such houses, always of brick or the local 
Berea Sandstone (also called Waverly), derive from 1700s Virginia, and reflect the 
tastes as well as the agricultural wealth of their owners—­post–­Revolutionary War 
landowners or their near descendants, who sent their abundant crops and livestock 
to the economic hub of Chillicothe, with its newly built canal.
SPRUCE HILL EARTHWORKS
Though difficult to access, and with only subtle, low, stone walls, 
the level summit of Spruce Hill is encircled by the largest Hopewell-­
era enclosure known.
Orientation. The steep hill just southeast of Bourneville (best 
seen from a cemetery about a half mile east of town) was ringed 
by low stone walls between 1 and 400 CE. At both ends of the 140-­
acre hilltop, the walls form unique reentrant gateways. From the 
top of Spruce Hill, magnificent views of the valley extend in all 
directions, which, in antiquity, would have encompassed a string 
of magnificent geometric earthworks: a circle near Bourneville as 
well as Baum and Seip. Access to the hilltop is via a steep climb up 
its northeastern slope, though beyond that point there are no devel-
oped trails or signage. The Arc of Appalachia’s website gives hiking 
information and thorough descriptions of the site’s archaeological 
and ecological significance. The built remains are hard to detect. 
While the gateways at both ends of the enclosure are visible, most 
of the surrounding walls are too low to readily appreciate.
Ancient Fires. Spruce Hill’s most intriguing story concerns evidence 
of intense fires built along its rim. They reached temperatures that 
can only be created in enclosed chambers. Chunks of vitrified soil 
The steep, striated cliffs of Copperas 
Mountain, visible to the east from Seip 
Earthworks, provided a variety of unusual 
and useful minerals.
Squier and Davis’s map of Spruce Hill,  
from Ancient Monuments of the  
Mississippi Valley, depicts its unusual  
reentrant gateways.
6 Small Circle and Ellipse. West of the large mound, the park’s 
mowing pattern defines the smaller circle (it’s actually quite large, 
extending far across the open field), and the small, interior-­ditched 
ellipse standing just inside the wall connecting the small circle to 
the square. In these western portions of the site, recent magnetom-
etry surveys show surviving traces of many subsurface features—­
more circles, post patterns, and rounded-­corner structures—­most 
of them unknown to the early nineteenth-­century surveyors, and 
yet to be investigated.
7 Square. The park’s landscaping and adjacent mowed path-
way outline the large square at Seip. Magnetic and LiDAR traces 
show that it was a perfect geometric figure with gateways at the 
midpoints of each side and at its corners. The sides are 1,079 feet, 
approximating the standard Hopewell length. The level terraces 
here step down slightly, because this location was more suscep-
tible than most geometric earthwork sites to extreme flooding 
throughout its geological history. Squier and Davis speculated that  
catastrophic floods could have been caused here by land slippage 
on the steep cliffs just across the river—­probably both before and 
after the earthen walls were constructed. A mowed path leads from 
the square to an interpretive platform by the riverbank.
Copperas Mountain. The great Hopewell earthworks were often 
placed in proximity to striking natural features. Visible about one 
mile to the east of Seip are the precipitous straited cliffs of Cop-
peras Mountain, a 350-­foot-­high exposure of Ohio and Bedford 
Shales, overlaid with this area’s characteristic Berea Sandstone. 
Minerals occur on the exposed face, including dolomite, barite, 
quartz, calcite, and pyrite. Efflorescence on the cliff face yields 
other compounds, some suitable for dying cloth. Other deposits in 
the valley here include alum (aluminum or potassium oxide) and 
the red ocher credited with suggesting the river’s name.


--- PDF PAGE 32 ---

48
49
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: WEST
SPRUCE HILL FIRES
National Park ranger Bruce Lombardo describes the evidence of the huge 
flaming spectacles that once burned atop Spruce Hill: In the 1930s, Emerson 
Greenman, an Ohio Historical Society archaeologist, did an excavation up at 
Spruce Hill. In his field notes he mentions finding chunks of clay, baked clay, 
that have the impressions of logs on them, and where those log impressions 
are in the clay, the surface of the clay has been vitrified, has been melted and 
glazed. It is possible that the Hopewell built some kind of log-­and-­rock-­and-­
soil pyre, burned it, and as the logs burned out they 
would have created these open spaces through the 
pyre. Well, you’re up on top of a drafty ridge, with a 
very good wind, and these open spaces may have 
acted as flues, as drafts. And inside those pyres, you 
may have reached temperatures where you melted 
sandstone and quartz. (Link to video is on page 205.)
The Hopewell Mound Group’s geometric, hilltop, and irregular walls and ditches enclosed 
a huge number of mounds and other features.
preserved. The trail drops into the vast open meadow where sur-
rounding walls and interior mounds are not easy to detect, although 
the 127-­acre extent of the site is evident from the surrounding tree 
lines. Informational signage throughout the site is abundant and 
helpful. The wide profile of the largest mound (Mound 25, left unre-
stored after excavations) anchors the space of the large field, while 
a few other mounds and a large circle are identified by signage. The 
major walls and mounds are defined by mowing.
History. This hallowed ground was probably in development and 
use over the entire period of Hopewell influence and then, like the 
others, reforested between about 400 and 1800 CE. Caleb Atwater 
illustrated the earthwork in 1820, as did Squier and Davis again in 
the 1840s, by which time farming was well underway. Later came 
two rail lines, one of which is repurposed today as a recreation-
al trail. Excavations of the largest mound yielded many artifacts 
for an exhibition at the 1893 Chicago World’s Fair. The collection 
was so spectacular that the whole culture was given the name of 
the site’s owner—­a Chillicothe merchant named Mordecai Cloud 
Hopewell. The land continued to be farmed until its acquisition, 
just in the past few decades. It became part of the National Park in 
1992. New research and remote sensing imagery continue to reveal 
more startling and superlative features in this amazing place—­by 
all evidence the most important in the Hopewell world.
found there were heated to the point where their sand crystals 
melted and recrystallized. Massive bonfires atop this prominent 
plateau would have made for an impressive spectacle, visible from 
all the major ceremonial centers in the Paint Valley and its tribu-
taries. Evidence from many earthwork sites points to intense burn-
ing, but Spruce Hill’s early fame among the colonial settlers had an 
unusual twist—­stoking a popular fantasy that Vikings or other Iron 
Age Europeans had once forged implements here.
 HOPEWELL MOUND GROUP
This vast complex was the Ancient Ohioans’ most revered sanctu-
ary—­a place of astonishing complexity, spectacular artistry, and the 
greatest variety and proliferation of mounds the culture ever created.
Orientation. Hopewell Mound Group (4731 Sulphur Lick Rd., Chilli- 
cothe) is easily reached either from Bourneville via Maple Grove 
Road, or from Chillicothe via US Route 50 and Anderson Station 
Road. The site is open daylight hours with no admission charge. 
From the parking area, a two-­mile loop trail leads to the site’s 
main features, beginning with a climb up the northern hill. Across 
the hilltop, the walls and ditches of the Great Enclosure are well 


--- PDF PAGE 33 ---

50
51
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
SACRED LANDSCAPES
The vast majority of Indian tribal religions  .  .  . have a sacred center at a 
particular place, be it a river, a mountain, a plateau, valley, or other natural 
feature. This center enables the people to look out along the four dimensions 
and locate their lands, to relate all historical events within the confines of this 
particular land, and to accept responsibility for it.
—Vine Deloria, American historian and theologian (1933–­2005,
Standing Rock Sioux)
Most of the northern  
hilltop perimeter of the large 
enclosure is well preserved, its 
walls and ditches dipping in and 
out of several small ravines.
A virtual reconstruction offers an orientation to 
the Hopewell Mound Group’s many mounds and  other 
features, and to the vast, strange splendor of this ceremonial 
place. Though now the “type site” for the culture, 
it was anything but typical. (Link to animation is on page 205.)
1 First Wayside. With a picnic shelter and restrooms nearby, the 
parking area focuses on a clearly marked trailhead with generous 
introductory signage. The initial, concrete-­paved trail segment 
leads to a wayside on the left providing seating, a bronze relief map 
of the earthwork, and the first vista through a clearing in the trees 
showing the spatial extent of the site. Although no earthwork ele-
ments are readily visible, the astonishing scale of the original en-
closure is indicated by the distant forested perimeter.
2 North Overlook. The trail enters the forest and climbs the hill-
side before opening into a large clearing (beneath an electrical 
transmission tower). An overview of the earthwork may be imag-
ined from here, with the subtle rise of the largest mound’s remains 
in the right-­hand distance just before the road. The walled Great 
Enclosure extended southward beyond the road to today’s tree line 
at the far edge of the site. This huge space, bounded by earthen 
walls and dotted with many mounds, was the ceremonial center of 
the entire Hopewell world.
3 Northern Walls and Ditches. From the clearing onward, remnants 
of the well-­preserved earthwork walls and exterior ditches are vis-
ible intermittently, and sometimes dramatically, through the trees; 
some of their vernal pools regularly retain water. Unlike the flat ter-
race below, this hilltop was never plowed, serving instead as pasture 
and woodlot throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (a 
pond from its agricultural days survives nearby in the woods). The 
trail swings far to the north, crossing a couple wooden bridges, be-
fore returning to the best views of some of the largest and most im-
pressive walls; it then descends to the level terrace below.
4 Western Wall. Only a portion of the defining wall survives along the 
western edge of the Great Enclosure. It is quite low and buried in the 
trees along the small, intermittent stream as it approaches the road. 
The ancients redirected a small spring in order to help maintain water 


--- PDF PAGE 34 ---

52
53
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
The Effigy’s Burials. Much of this wealth of exotic materials and 
masterful artistry accompanied the 102 Ancestors who were laid 
to rest beneath the effigy. All was prepared with the fullest ritual 
and care. Though early excavations of these sacred remains can-
not be undone, their records and the artifacts themselves tell us 
much about the people, their leaders, their beliefs, and their ways 
of life and death. Some of the burials were first burned in another 
location, then the remaining ash and bone swept together and re-
deposited here. Most were buried unburned, though, stretched out 
in log tombs. Inside buildings, some of the tombs were covered 
with small mounds. When the buildings were decommissioned, all 
the remains were subsumed within the larger mound.
6 Flint Mound (Mound 2). Some mounds were built to cover not 
burials but huge deposits of unworked materials. (One mound at 
the Mound City, for example, covered a fire basin filled only with 
thirty pounds of galena—­lead sulfide—­all left in its shiny, crystal-
line form.) At the Hopewell Mound Group, mounds were dedicated 
to mica slabs and to a huge pile of obsidian pieces. And Mound 2 
held over 8,000 nearly identical flint discs, laid down carefully in 
two layers and set in fine gravel on the floor of a building. They 
came from quarries in Indiana, Kentucky, and beyond, and were 
arranged here in little bundles, each about as many as one person 
could carry.
Material Deposits. On the floor of Mound 25, the people placed two 
Great Deposits of objects, many ritually broken and burned. The 
variety was astonishing, as is the complex precision with which 
they were sometimes arranged. Contrasting dualities positioned all 
the black obsidian, for example, in the eastern deposit, and all the 
white pearls in the western one. Two other deposits, left under a 
small mound near the hillside, also showed a deliberate contrast—­
all the mica was in one, laid on a square tablet, while all the copper 
was in the other, laid on a round disc. To those who left them, the 
Magnetometry of Mound 25 shows four 
rectangular shapes along its sides, perhaps the stylized 
paws of a crouching panther.
Warren King Moorehead’s 1891 sketch of the Effigy 
(Mound 25) shows its profile, suggesting a reclining 
animal, and the stone outline of a panther.
This computer reconstruction of the  
building preceding the Flint Mound shows 
the neatly stacked bundles of discs laid 
across the center of its floor.
An artist’s collage depicts 
some of the exquisite artistry laid down 
beneath Mound 25—­much of it crafted in 
materials from far away such as 
Lake Superior copper.
in this ditch—­again suggesting the great importance they attached to 
completing a water boundary for the site, as at Fort Ancient.
5 The Effigy (Mound 25).The largest mound was a triple lobed form 
over 500 feet long. In the nineteenth century it was called “The Ef-
figy” and now, more prosaically, “Mound 25.” It was constructed 
over the carefully laid remains of elaborate rituals, as well as spec-
tacular artistry and regalia. The builders removed the topsoil to 
reach a clay layer, and then mixed clay and water to create a hard 
floor surface—­it’s been called “Hopewell concrete.” Over several 
generations, ceremonies were held here, some inside buildings 
and some out in the open on the prepared floor. They dug pits, built 
fires, and covered certain areas with stones or multicolored clay. 
They brought many precious things to the site—­beautiful objects 
crafted in materials from far away like obsidian and copper—­often 
breaking and burning them before placing them in ritual deposits.


--- PDF PAGE 35 ---

54
55
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
Magnetometry shows the postholes, ditch, 
gateways, and central ovens of the Hopewell 
Mound Group’s large circle woodhenge.
THE COSMOLOGICAL PLAN
The architecture of the earthworks, whether it’s a simple oval, a square, or 
a circle combined with a square, or some other kind of geometric figure, 
really is an attempt to create, on Earth, a cosmological plan. And these 
things are situated and oriented in such a way as to, in a sense, re-­create 
the cosmos on Earth. The basic rationale for doing something of this sort is 
that many different peoples are being brought together, who do not have all 
the institutions for keeping them more or less settled and off each other’s 
backs. So under the plan of the heavens on earth, you now create the context 
in which people can meet, and undertake ceremonies, and gossip, and 
exchange various things, all with the gods looking at them.
—­James Brown, Professor Emeritus of Anthropology and
Archaeology, Northwestern University
the western edge of a perfect square with the usual midpoint and 
corner openings. As at other sites nearby, the square was com-
posed of noticeably red soil. Dr. Edwin Davis noted in 1845 that “the 
wall of the square is wholly of clay, and its outlines may be easily 
traced by the eye, from a distance, by its color. . . . That (the walls) 
have been subjected to the action of fire, is too obvious to admit of 
doubt.” Mowed trails follow the full perimeter of the square and 
return toward the first wayside and the parking area.
 CHILLICOTHE
This historic town, in its striking setting, was the first capital of 
Ohio, having taken its name from the Shawnee capital (or chilli- 
cothe) it displaced. Centuries earlier, this convergence of valleys 
was the capital, or sacred heartland, of the far-­reaching Hopewell 
world.
History and Setting. The name Chillicothe derives from the Shaw-
nee “Chalahgawtha,” which means “principal town”—­the seat of 
the tribe’s chief. But this fine setting, on a large bend in the Scioto 
River amid some of the region’s most distinctive landscapes, was a 
place of primary importance both long before, and afterward. The 
huge, ancient Teays Valley emerges here from the Appalachian Pla-
teau, and the prominent, mountain-­like Logan Range defines the 
dual deposits probably symbolized two parts of a whole, like night 
and day, or summer and winter—­or signs of unity between groups, 
ideas, or individuals. They were placed among burials, but not con-
nected with any particular one.
7 Large Circle Woodhenge. Comprehensive remote sensing sur-
veys carried out in the 2010s brought to light a 410-­foot-­diameter 
circular ditch and embankment corresponding to the earthen 
ring recorded here by Squier and Davis in the 1840s. The images 
also showed a line of regularly spaced postholes along the ditch’s 
inner edge. Excavations have since confirmed that the earthen ring 
traced the outline of a huge, dismantled woodhenge similar to the 
one found at the Stubbs Earthworks in Warren County in 1998 (see 
page 132). The circle had four symmetrically placed gateways, com-
plete with causeways across the inner ditch. In the center, a set of 
four carefully positioned Earth ovens were large enough to bake 
feasts for the assembled crowds, 
which may well have gathered 
to witness the alignment of the 
midsummer sunset through the 
circle’s northwestern gateway.
Small Circle. A little to the north of the large circle, a smaller, 100-­
foot circle was first detected in 2001, when a National Park Service 
team began their early remote sensing survey work inside the Great 
Enclosure. One day, a startling image appeared: the trace of a long-­
lost earthen ring and ditch, completely invisible on the surface. It 
had also been invisible to Squier and Davis when they recorded 
the site in the 1840s. Later magnetometry surveys revealed a set of 
four Earth ovens (also carefully positioned) outside the circle and 
directly aligned with its eastern gateway; they appear identical to 
those in the center of the larger circle.
8 Eastern Wall and Square. Just past the remains of another large 
mound (Mound 23), the Great Enclosure’s eastern wall and its ac-
companying ditch are faintly perceptible running perpendicular 
from the road, aligned with the clearing on the hilltop. They form 


--- PDF PAGE 36 ---

56
57
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: WEST
The Temple of the Winds near Fifth and Paint Streets is the most elegantly 
detailed of Chillicothe’s many outstanding Greek Revival houses.
The historic center of 
Chillicothe  preserves 
an unusually rich and 
diverse collection of 
nineteenth-­century 
commercial buildings.
northeastern horizon. For the Shawnee, this was one in a series of 
several chillicothes as the tribe was being forced westward by settle-
ment. (Another is commemorated today at the Great Council State 
Park; see pages 106–107.) Many centuries earlier, this was the center 
of Ohio’s ancient earthwork-­building culture, and the town stands 
today among several of its most spectacular ceremonial sites.
Ohio’s First Capital. The present town was founded in 1796 and four 
years later was named the capital of the eastern half of the North-
west Territory. In 1803 it became the new state’s first capital. Pros-
perity came early to this new American settlement on the banks of 
the Scioto, a gateway for settlement and commerce in the Virginia 
Military District stretching westward from here to the Little Miami 
River. Early culture and commerce were influenced by wealthy, war-­
veteran landowners from Virginia, whose huge estates produced 
cattle, pigs, and corn in abundance. In 1831, the new Ohio and Erie 
Canal came through town, creating decades of prosperity as a com-
mercial hub for the vast agricultural lands opening westward.
The Heart of It All. The intersection of Main and Paint Streets marks 
the center of more than sixteen blocks of diverse, interesting his-
toric architecture, much of it already standing in the 1840s when 
Chillicothe newspaper editor Ephraim Squier and local physician 
Edwin Davis collaborated here on their Ancient Monuments of the 
Mississippi Valley, the first publication of the newly established 
Smithsonian Institution. Historian Roger Kennedy aptly called 
Ohio’s first capital the “Delphi of North America”—­no less for its 
remarkable concentration of Greek Revival architecture than for 
its status as the heartland of the brilliant Hopewell culture, whose 
influence was spread across much of the continent sixteen centu-
ries earlier. That status is well reflected in a local saying: “If Julius 
Ceasar had had an embassy in North America, it would have been 
in Chillicothe, Ohio!” The Ross-­Chillicothe Convention and Visitors 
Bureau, from its website or offices (230 North Plaza Blvd.), can pro-
vide further information on where to stay and eat, and what to do.
Downtown Historic Districts. Chillicothe has preserved much of its 
nineteenth-­century urban fabric, especially along Paint, Second, 
and Water Streets. An unusually large concentration of pre–­Civil 
War commercial buildings, plus superb specimens of historic 
houses, churches, public, and commercial buildings line the 
nearby streets. Especially impressive are the many Greek Revival 
examples, dating from the heyday of the canal era. Several line 
West Main and Second Streets, but the finest are on South Paint 
Street: the unusual and delicately detailed Temple of the Winds (at 
#134); the large mansion next door (on the corner of Fifth Street); 
and the Atwood House (now a fine bed-­and-­breakfast, at #68); all 
dating from the late 1840s. Quaint old storefronts line Water Street, 
once the canal route. James Emmitt’s giant, canal-­side warehouse 
(from the 1850s) still stands on Mulberry Street. Paint Street is a 


--- PDF PAGE 37 ---

58
59
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: WEST
Each governmental  
department in the Ross 
County Courthouse was 
designed with its own  
ornamental entrance onto 
South Paint Street.
A plate from Squier and Davis’s Ancient 
Monuments of the Mississippi Valley shows 
the many geometric earthworks recorded in 
the Chillicothe vicinity in the 1840s.
textbook of both early-­ and late-­1800s architecture, anchored by the 
unusual 1850s Ross County Courthouse, with its separate front doors 
for each department. The Majestic Theater (42 East Second St.) has 
hosted many famous artists during its 150-­plus continuous years  
of operation.
Ross County Heritage Center. A collection of buildings just off South 
Paint Street unifies the various facilities of the Ross County Histor-
ical Society (45 West Fifth St.). The museum offers docent-­escorted 
tours at a modest fee. The artifact exhibits fill a historic mansion, 
telling the stories of Indigenous antiquity, early Northwest Territory 
and statehood history, Chillicothe’s days as Ohio’s first capital, and its 
canal-­era commercial prominence. The county’s role in the nation’s 
wars is told through important historical figures, and especially 
Camp Sherman, the massive World War I training camp north of 
town. Two beautiful scale models depict Chillicothe’s historic char-
acter during its early settler days and after the arrival of the railroads. 
A collection of unique historical vehicles (including a bandwagon, 
hearse, and early fire engine) round out the exhibits. The adjacent 
Knowles Log House portrays the conditions of daily life for the area’s 
early settlers. The McKell Library holds extensive collections of rare 
books, manuscripts, photographs, and other historical documents.
Story Mound. Near the center of a residential district northwest of 
downtown (452 Delano Ave.), stands the Story Mound. Partially ex-
cavated in 1897, it revealed one burial and evidence of a circular sub-­
mound building. It resembles a more famous mound that once stood 
about a mile to the northwest, at the foot of the hill on which Thomas 
Worthington built his Adena Estate. There, in 1901, William Mills of 
the Ohio Historical and Archaeological Society (now the Ohio His-
tory Connection) identified the characteristics that came to define 
the Adena culture, including certain burial practices and a circular 
building plan. Called the Adena 
Mound, it also contained an ap-
parently unique pottery object, 
the now-­iconic Adena Pipe—­an 
eight-­inch figure of a man wear-
ing a headdress, loincloth, and 
feather bustle, his knees bent as 
if he’s dancing.
Belleview Avenue. From near 
the corner of Fifth and Walnut, 
Belleview Avenue angles up the 
hill to the southwest. This road 
was once a section of Zane’s 
Trace (on its way from Wheeling 
to Maysville; see page 79), connecting what is now Marietta Road 
northeast of town with State Route 772 heading southwest beyond 
Paint Creek. It passes early mansions like the 1826 Italianate-­Greek-­
Revival hybrid called Tanglewood, with its unusual rooftop light 
monitor, curving staircase, and graceful Ionic porticos. Across the 
street (239 Belleview Ave.) is the entrance to Grandview Cemetery, 
where Felix Renick, Thomas Worthington, and other prominent 
founders are buried, and from which there are fine views of the 
town, the nearby Logan Range, and especially (to the south) the 
broad, ancient Teays Valley framed between its prominent, unglaci-
ated hills (see photo on page 8).
Junction Earthworks. A grassy meadow at 618 Bellevue Avenue is 
filled with the intact foundations of a fascinating cluster of small 
geometric earthworks—­one of several such groupings recorded 
in the Chillicothe area in the 1800s. A loop trail connects a prodi-
gious variety of shapes including circles, crescents, rounded-­corner  
rectangles, and an apparently unique quatrefoil (a merging of four 
partial circles better known in Gothic architecture). Each figure had 
an interior ditch. Although the shapes are not always maintained by 
differential mowing, a free downloadable app by the Heartland Earth-
works Conservancy explains the site, envisioning it with animations 


--- PDF PAGE 38 ---

60
61
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
and an augmented reality (AR) 
model. Just a mile to the north, 
a similar but larger group called 
the Steel Earthworks is also pre-
served, with one of its circles still 
visible in relief. Steel’s earthworks 
are not developed or mowed for visibility, but the site can be reached 
on foot via a two-­mile loop trail—­signposted (without parking) on the 
right about 1,500 feet west from Junction’s parking lot. The Arc of 
Appalachia’s website offers more details on both sites.
Buzzard’s Roost Nature Preserve. Continue west from the Junction 
Earthworks via a winding, densely forested route to reach Buz-
zard’s Roost, a unit of the Ross County Park District (514 Red Bird 
Ln., Chillicothe), with nearly 1,200 acres of rugged and scenic ter-
rain. More than five miles of trails pass by ponds, old homesteads, 
and deep wooded ravines. The highlight is the South Point Lookout 
Trail, providing views of the vertical sandstone and shale cliffs of 
the narrow, inaccessible (except by water) Paint Creek Gorge. The 
abrupt landscape contrasts characterizing the Chillicothe area 
SAVING JUNCTION EARTHWORKS
The stunning magnetometry image of the Junction Earthworks helped 
persuade donors to save the site from destruction. Arc of Appalachia 
director Nancy Stranahan explains: That amazing image had an awful lot 
to do with saving Junction Earthworks. The fact that that image went public, 
and showed people something that they had really never seen in modern 
times—­the revelation of these nine figures scripted on the land, becoming 
visible again—­was just contagious. And in that excitement that spread across 
Ohio, knowing that the auction was coming up so quickly, people became 
very generous. And we were able to raise $300,000 in just eight days, which 
has never happened before or since for our organization! (Link to video is on 
page 205.)
Despite no surface relief today, 
the shapes at the Junction 
Earthworks, including its unique 
quatrefoil, stand out clearly in 
magnetometry data.
Thomas Worthington’s Adena Mansion outside Chillicothe was designed by America’s first  
professional architect, Benjamin Henry Latrobe.
are evident from two clifftop promontories—­overlooking both the 
narrow, forested canyon to the south, and the distant, open, level 
horizon to the northwest.
Adena Mansion and Gardens. On the prominent hill just northwest 
of town (847 Adena Rd., Chillicothe) stands the stately home of 
Thomas Worthington, Ohio’s first US Senator and a two-­term gov-
ernor. He built the house between 1802 and 1807 and later named 
it Adena, which he understood to refer, in Hebrew, to a place with 
a “delightful situation.” His wealth and his idealism for what the 
new lands in the West could become are reflected in his ambitious 
choice to hire America’s first professional architect, Benjamin 
Henry Latrobe, to draw the plans (on the advice of his friend and 
political mentor Thomas Jefferson). The design drew on many in-
fluences, thanks to Latrobe’s extensive travels and education—­from 
West Virginia stone manor houses like the one Worthington grew 
up in, to villas by the Italian Renaissance master Andrea Palladio. 
The Ohio History Connection has restored the house and gardens 
since acquiring them in 1946. A modern museum and education 
center interprets the life and history of the Worthington family and 
early-­1800s Ohio.
Thomas Worthington. Born into a well-­to-­do family in Charles-
town, now in West Virginia, in 1773, Worthington was among those, 
especially from the slave states, seeking a new start in the West.  


--- PDF PAGE 39 ---

62
63
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: WEST
The distinct profile of  
Chillicothe’s Logan Range,  
as seen from Thomas 
Worthington’s Adena Estate, 
inspired the Great Seal of  
the State of Ohio.
COFFEE CUPS AND CAKES
All the ironies of the relationship between the founders and the Indians came 
together in the drawing room at Adena in 1807, when this thirty-­four-­year-­
old Virginia squire entertained, for coffee and cakes, Tecumseh, Blue Jacket, 
The Panther, and Round Head—­the leaders of an Indian confederacy which 
came to a bloody end seven years later at the Battle of the Thames, when 
Tecumseh was killed. But in this place, equals were dealing with equals, and in 
fact equals were so conscious of their equalness that the Indians made jokes 
about the coffee being distributed to them, pretending that they were savages, 
which they were not. They pretended, three of the four, that they didn’t know 
how to handle coffee cups and cakes, though all of them had spent plenty of 
time in the communities in which coffee and cakes were frequent artifices. 
After the little action of pretending that they didn’t know how to do all this, 
they in fact spent a whole week around here, living with the Worthingtons and 
celebrating their common presence in the midst of a deep antiquity—­to which 
the Worthingtons were visitors, and the Indians were not.
—­Roger G. Kennedy, American Historian and Former Director
of the National Park Service
Mound City’s forms may be at their most beautiful when tinged with early sunlight on a  
frosty spring morning.
Tecumseh Outdoor Drama. The story of the great Shawnee leader 
Tecumseh is retold in an outdoor drama every summer at the Sugar-
loaf Mountain Amphitheatre (5968 Marietta Rd., Chillicothe), from 
early June to early September. Tecumseh’s name in Shawnee means 
“shooting star,” suggesting the brilliant but brief career of this leg-
endary leader, remembered for his heroic resistance to the confis-
cation of his people’s lands and the destruction of their way of life.
MOUND CITY
This cluster of restored mounds sets a solemn and peaceful mood, 
as a place of reverent memory. Now as the headquarters of the Na-
tional Park, it offers an optimal orientation to the Hopewell heart-
land’s monumental antiquities.
Orientation. Mound City lies three miles north of downtown Chilli-
cothe (16062 SR 104, Chillicothe) in a wooded enclave between two 
prisons. The parking area and the Hopewell Culture National His-
torical Park visitor center face an iconic view of the mounds (at its 
best on a sunlit early morning). A low earthen wall encloses two 
dozen mounds; its two gateways suggest an axial passage from the 
visitor center to the steep banks of the Scioto River beyond. Eight 
constructed pits surround the enclosure. Some of the mounds 
held skillfully crafted ceremonial artistry including effigy smoking 
pipes, copper sculptures, and shimmering blankets of mica.
His idealism was reflected in his estate, but also in his many polit-
ical accomplishments—­as an advocate for Ohio statehood, a key 
author of its Constitution, and a senator and state representative 
advocating for the construction of the state’s canal system. He also 
respected the Natives and hoped for a peaceful future. The land of 
his beloved Adena grew to 25,000 acres and produced cattle, pigs, 
and Merino sheep, as well as a diversified mix of crops. The Great 
Seal of the State of Ohio was conceived here when Worthington and 
some friends looked out from the hilltop one morning (after a long 
night of cards, as the story goes) just as the Sun was rising over the  
wide Scioto Valley and the Logan Range beyond—­now Great Seal 
State Park.


--- PDF PAGE 40 ---

64
65
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
about a variety of topics related to the earthworks and the daily life 
of their builders. Topics and their associated materials and artifacts 
may change frequently, so visitors are encouraged to return often.
2 Borrow Pits. Large pits just outside the enclosure wall (especially 
prominent on the western side facing the parking lot) suggest they 
might have been “borrow pits” from which soil was taken to build 
the mounds. But these flat river terraces are formed from hundreds 
of feet of gravel—­the bed of the ancient Teays River—­lying beneath 
only a thin layer of topsoil. Holes this deep would have yielded very 
little soil suitable for building mounds. Investigations have now 
shown that these pits were lined with stone and clay to help them 
hold water—­a recurring theme in Hopewell site design also seen at 
Fort Ancient, Newark’s Great Circle, and elsewhere.
3 Enclosing Wall. In its day, Mound City was much more than just 
a silent “city of the dead.” The number of buildings and mounds 
grew over time here, maybe for as long as four centuries, and 
many generations. Many things went on here, including various 
building projects right up until the enclosing wall was built, and  
perhaps after. Large amounts of charcoal and deer bone found in 
the wall suggest festivals and feasting. The large enclosure reflected 
what may have been a new idea at the time, that sacred spaces  
should be framed by a geometric boundary. Perhaps this was  
the starting point for the many variations on this idea at other 
Hopewell earthworks, with the 
rounded-­corner rectangle de-
rived directly from the shape of 
the buildings beneath the indi-
vidual mounds.
Shriver Circle. Squier and Davis’s map pairs Mound City with a large 
circle to the south, whose invisible remnants now lie in a field and 
prison yard along both sides of State Route 104. When the highway 
was being widened, archaeologists investigated and found the cir-
cle’s twelve-­foot-­deep exterior ditch, lined with a foot-­thick layer of 
clay to hold the slopes and water. Associated burials in its central 
An artist’s collage depicts one of the 
large pits adjacent to Mound City’s 
enclosure wall, with its clay and stone 
lining still holding water as intended.
History. Mound City is the only surviving Hopewell necropolis—­a 
gathering of mounds commemorating the mortuary rituals and re-
mains entombed beneath them. The accumulated mounds, and the 
enclosing wall, reflect several generations of use before the site was 
left to forest cover after 400 CE. A Virginia veteran was granted the 
land in 1798, and within forty years the busy Ohio and Erie Canal 
passed nearby. When Squier and Davis surveyed the site in 1846, the 
forest still preserved most of the mounds, but soon after, the land 
was cleared and annual plowing began. In 1917, the federal govern-
ment bought the land for Camp Sherman, a World War I training 
camp. The army was shaving off all the mounds to build barracks 
when Henry Shetrone of the Ohio History Connection stepped in 
and asked that the central mound be spared. In the 1920s, after the 
camp was decommissioned, careful archaeological investigations 
were undertaken, and the mounds were restored.
1 Visitor Center. This is the primary point of orientation for all the 
earthworks in Hopewell Culture National Historical Park, including, 
besides Mound City, Seip Earthworks, Hopewell Mound Group, and 
the Hopeton Earthworks. Park service rangers provide a warm wel-
come, helpful knowledge, free informational materials, and periodic 
tours. A video program—­and a well-­stocked book shop—­offer further 
interpretive perspectives. In a small exhibit space, visitors can learn 


--- PDF PAGE 41 ---

66
67
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
mound suggested that Shriver Cir-
cle predated Mound City. It is easy 
to imagine that Shriver (a circle) 
and Mound City (a rounded-­corner 
square) became prototypes for a 
new hybrid design at the Hopeton 
Earthworks just across the river—­
and on to further geometrical elabo-
rations and perfections throughout 
the Hopewell era, although such a 
sequence has yet to be proven.
4 Paired Mounds. Two mounds near Mound City’s western gateway 
(Mounds 12 and 13) cover the remains of two interconnected build-
ings. On the floor of one were several pits and clay basins, suggesting 
places of preparation for the more formal rituals and deposits next 
door. The larger building held elaborate burials; one group rested 
beneath shimmering blankets of mica along with many precious ob-
jects. Four other burials were accompanied by objects crafted from 
precious copper—­double-­headed vultures, an animal headdress 
with movable ears, and copper deer antlers. This dual-­chambered 
building may have been a model for other, larger versions like that at 
the Seip Earthworks (see pages 43–44).
Ceremonies. The buried wealth left under the mounds was the par-
aphernalia of solemn rituals and performances. Fires burned in 
shallow clay basins, central to ceremonies during which the dead 
were cremated and symbolic objects were ritually killed (broken 
or burned, or both) to be left with them. The ash and remains were 
swept up and placed carefully on the building floor, or on low earthen 
platforms. In a final ceremony, the people took down or burned the 
building and built up a mound over its remains and contents. While 
Mound City was in use, visitors would have seen functioning build-
ings here, standing among the mounds commemorating those al-
ready gone.
5 Pipes Mound. Under another mound (Mound 8), a large bag had 
been placed next to a clay basin; it was filled with ashes, beads, 
Squier and Davis’s 1840s drawing of 
Mound City and the huge Shriver Circle 
also shows the canal and the future 
State Route 104 passing by.
HOPEWELL AGRICULTURE
National Park archaeologist Bret Ruby explains the scope and methods of 
Hopewell agriculture, based on evidence from Mound City and elsewhere: They 
participated in the cultivation, the domestication, of a whole suite of native starchy 
and oily seeded plants that contributed a significant amount of their diet. They 
weren’t living strictly on the fruits of nature; these people were clearing ground, 
planting crops, harvesting crops, and they were fully committed agriculturalists. 
The kind of agriculture they were practicing was probably swidden agriculture, 
where they’re moving, they’re clearing plots, using them for a period of years, 
probably not more than seven years or so, until the soil fertility was depleted, 
and then they’re clearing other plots. There’s evidence 
of this in the seed assemblages from Hopewell sites: At 
about this time you start to see a spike in forest-­edge-­
type species: elderberry, sumac, early successional 
species. They are clearing plots for agriculture, probably 
also clearing land for earthwork construction. (Link to 
video is on page 205.)
some copper items, and about 200 carved stone effigy smoking 
pipes, all purposely broken. The pipe bowls portrayed a variety of 
animals (and a few human heads), carved with accuracy, great art-
istry, and intricate detail. Another deposit of almost identical pipes 
was found at the Tremper Mound, forty miles south of Mound City 
along the Scioto River. The animals carved on the pipes are tradi-
tional figures in Eastern Woodland stories, creatures with their own 
will and power, including beavers, falcons, serpents, and turtles, 
among others. Edwin Davis excavated the pipes in the 1840s and, 
unable to find a domestic buyer, sold them to an Englishman; this 
explains why they are now exhibited in London’s British Museum.
6 Mound 15. One mound here is left unrestored, with the positions 
of its precursor building’s framing posts indicated by markers set 
in the ground. Before 100 CE, Mound City began with just a few cer-
emonial houses like this one, their fire basins and doorways with a 
variety of orientations. Some of these had probably been disman-
tled (or burned) and mounded over by the time a second devel-
opment phase began. The people erected three central buildings, 


--- PDF PAGE 42 ---

68
69
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: WEST
THE BROKEN PIPES
Well, first of all, the pipes are not just an implement that we use to smoke 
sacred tobacco. We didn’t look at it as being a piece of art. We didn’t look at 
it as being an implement we could go “ooh” and “aah” to. We looked on it as 
alive. We needed that spirit, if it was a bear, or if it was whatever animal you 
had . . . in that pipe, that was alive. [And] . . . maybe that’s the catalyst of your 
ceremony. That’s the catalyst of your prayer. You can go no higher, you can 
never use it again, and so you break it. That’s the most ultimate—­this is not 
going to make sense in English—­the most ultimate, sacred thing you could do. 
The most sacred thing you can do, because that is your life right there, that’s 
your pipe.
—­Gerard Baker, retired National Park Service Superintendent
    (Mandan-­Hidatsa)
As seen from the visitor center in winter, Mound City echoes the profile of the Logan Range 
across the river, whose features also mark solar and lunar alignments from this spot.
creating a new ritual focus toward which at least seven more build-
ings were then oriented, and built the low enclosing wall to further 
strengthen the unity and formality of the site. The overall spatial 
order created by these final features may reflect an increasing or-
ganization and social ranking among the people.
Squares with Rounded Corners. The shape of Mound City’s enclos-
ing wall, in mathematical terms, is a “superellipse”—­though some 
prefer the more colloquial “squircle.” Hopewell sites and artistry 
use variations on this gently flare-­sided, rounded-­corner shape 
at all scales—­earthworks, building plans, crematory basins, and 
sometimes the artifacts left within them. Recent remote sensing 
surveys have revealed that these matching shapes are everywhere 
in the Hopewell world, traced in both building outlines and interior-­
ditched earthworks. Some now-­invisible earthworks were drawn as 
circles by nineteenth-­century surveyors, but remote sensing now 
reveals them instead to be this distinctly Hopewell form.
7 Central Mound. The focal point of Mound City is the nineteen-­
foot-­tall Central Mound (Mound 7). It covered the remains of a 
complex building: A sunken room, entered along a ramp, was cen-
tered on a shallow, clay-­lined basin recessed in the floor and baked 
red by many fires. Sometime later, leaving a set of posts in place, 
the people filled the room and built a new clay fire basin exactly 
above the old one. Upon a new floor, of puddled clay and sand, 
they erected a building and laid out ten cremated burials on log-­
supported earthen platforms, roofed with bark. Three elaborate 
burials in the Central Mound were clearly respected leaders, ac-
companied by precious regalia and other objects crafted in copper 
and other exotic materials.
Eastern Horizon. From the position of Mound City—­and most pre-
cisely the Central Mound—­the Logan Range forms a symmetrical 
profile along the eastern horizon (visible now only in winter). The 
peaks of the mountains at either end mark the alignment positions 
of the minimum northern and minimum southern moonrises (ex-
plained on page 92). The outer base points of those same mountains 
align to the summer and winter solstice sunrises. These phenomena 
turn Mound City and its eastern horizon into an astronomical sight-
ing instrument, connecting the orders of the cosmos to the rituals of 
the people who gathered here to celebrate the lives of their leaders 
and deceased kin.
8 Scioto Riverbank. A paved walk leads down to a viewing platform 
above the bank of the Scioto River, where many of the people arriv-
ing for the rituals at Mound City would have disembarked from their 
canoes. The fast-­flowing water and the steep, forested embankment 
created a dramatic threshold for their entry into the ceremonial 
enclosure. A notch in the steep hillside (now fitted with concrete 
stairs) approximates the effect of the Hopewell “graded ways” that 
monumentalized the riverine approaches to other earthworks—­for 


--- PDF PAGE 43 ---

70
71
World Heritage Route: WEST
World Heritage Route: WEST
The circle and octagon at 
High Bank Works resemble 
those at Newark, although 
their orientation and 
configuration are adapted 
to astronomical sight lines 
at this latitude.
ANCIENT ASTRONOMY
Archaeoastronomy scholar Anthony Aveni explains how an ancient 
society’s reasons for marking celestial alignments would have been 
connected to other aspects of their lives, like the changing seasons: 
I think it’s change of time that matters in many of these cultures, that one 
would mark those significant “hinges in the fabric of time,” hinges when 
critical changes take place, when food shortages might occur, when the 
animals who are normally killed might migrate or leave; these are the points 
of tension in the calendar. I think this is a marvelous 
way of connecting the ecosphere, the ecological 
environment, with the heavens. And maybe we 
modern astronomers tend to cut off the heavens 
from the rest of the world—­from the mountains, 
the water, the plants, the animals, to which, I 
think, most ancient cultures would have forged a 
connection. (Link to video is on page 205.)
example, Marietta’s Sacra Via (see page 201). Returning from the riv-
erbank, wander among the mounds and admire the way their forms 
shift in perspective, or take the trail through the woods north of the 
enclosure past sandstone blocks relocated from the nearby canal.
HIGH BANK WORKS
The principal significance of High Bank Works is its resemblance 
to Newark’s Octagon Earthworks, and the closely related precision 
of both sites’ lunar (and here also solar) alignments.
A Research Preserve. After many decades of farming, the walls of the 
High Bank Works are only faintly discernable on the ground today. 
Yet the exact outlines of the site’s interconnected circle and octagon 
appear on recent remote sensing images, making it clear this is a 
near twin with Newark’s Octagon Earthworks. Both are geometrical 
and astronomical masterpieces. While Newark and High Bank are 
about sixty miles apart, they were designed using similar principles. 
Their circles share the same diameter, and each harmonizes with its 
adjacent octagon—­at High Bank, the center points of the octagon’s 
eight sides all fall on a circle of equal diameter. Mainly of archae-
ological and astronomical significance, it is a research preserve 
located southeast of Chillicothe, and only open to visitors by special 
arrangement through Hopewell Culture National Historical Park.
Lunar and Solar Alignments. Professors Ray Hively and Robert 
Horn, of Earlham College (in Richmond, Indiana), have shown that 
High Bank, like Newark’s Octagon, encodes all eight of the horizon 
positions where the moonrise appears to reverse itself during its 
long 18.6-­year cycle (see page 92). But unlike Newark, High Bank 
also has alignments to the four solstices. The principal axes of the 
two designs are exactly ninety degrees to each other. The builders 
could not simply replicate Newark’s design, due to the difference 
in latitude, so they had to create here another equally complex and 
subtle instrument. The fact that there are two similar earthworks, 
built by the same culture, with so many shared features, and both 
aligned to the long, complex, lunar cycle, provides the strongest 
evidence of the extraordinary genius of Ancient Ohio’s Indigenous 
astronomer-­architects.
TO THE UPPER SCIOTO ROUTE
From the Chillicothe area, head north to Circleville, with a fine historic center, canal 
remnants, and an interesting (albeit vanished) earthwork; then on to the greater 
Columbus area with several mounds and earthworks, the state capitol, and the Ohio 
History Connection’s headquarters, museum, and historic Ohio Village (see map, 
page 150).
TO THE LOWER SCIOTO ROUTE
Southeast out of Chillicothe, follow the most impressive stretch of the ancient 
Teays Valley to Piketon and Wakefield, the important Tremper Mound, and on to 
the remains of the vast earthwork complex at Portsmouth, and its Southern Ohio 
Museum. Loop eastward to Jackson, the restored Buckeye Furnace ironworks, and 
the Leo Petroglyphs (see map, page 162).


--- PDF PAGE 44 ---

73
3
World Heritage Route
East
Beginning with the Hopeton Earthworks, a companion site just 
across the Scioto River from Mound City, the route connecting the 
World Heritage–­inscribed sites continues toward the northeast. 
It skirts the edges of the Appalachian foothills and approximates 
an ancient roadway that may have connected Chillicothe and 
Newark—­the Hopewell culture’s two greatest ceremonial centers.
HOPETON EARTHWORKS
Just across the Scioto River from Mound City, a long trail to an ele-
vated vantage point offers the finest appreciation of the vastness of 
the Hopewell landscape. In the foreground of the broad valley vista 
lie the clearly outlined remains of a huge circle and square.
Orientation. The Hopeton Earthworks are accessible by car from 
Mound City (via a bridge north of the site), or from the center of 
Chillicothe (via North Bridge Street). A parking area (990 Hopetown 
Rd.) is open daylight hours. The trail climbs quickly to the second 
From an elevated, third-­terrace viewpoint, the park’s mowing program accentuates  
the otherwise subtle outlines of Hopeton’s large geometric shapes.


--- PDF PAGE 45 ---

74
75
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
The stunning view over the earthworks here is from a third terrace. 
The three-­tiered structure of the land here, and how the earthworks 
are placed on it, are vividly portrayed on Squier and Davis’s Chilli-
cothe area map shown on page 59.
2 Stone Circle Wayside. Sittable blocks of the region’s characteristic 
Waverly Sandstone define the park’s overlook, from which a pan-
oramic view encompasses all of Hopeton’s design elements. At left is 
the large, slightly irregular square; subtle rises in the old farm road 
across the site show the spread soil of its degraded walls. The large 
circle spreads out to the right and slightly overlaps the square. The 
circle’s walls were much lower to begin with, and are visible now only 
with the help of the plantings. In the foreground, two smaller circles 
open into the east side of the square. In the distance, the mowing 
scheme also defines a portion of long parallel walls that once led to 
the bank of an old channel of the river.
ELABORATION AND RITUAL
Comparative religion scholar David Cave explains why, across cultures, 
sacred spaces and ritual objects are generally so large, impressive, or 
elaborate: One of the things we find in representations of the sacred is the 
element of excessiveness. The sacred, the things that seem to symbolize 
great power and great mystery, is indeed just that: mysterious, powerful, to 
be treated with care, even associated with taboo, danger, because it’s outside 
the remove—­it’s outside of ordinary existence, ordinary things. And so, you 
find that in rituals, there’s always this degree of going over and beyond what 
could be done very quickly. Why must costuming be so elaborate? Why must 
the ritual be so detailed, and followed so precisely over such a period of time? 
Why must a structure be so grand, when, if we’re 
just going to be making a statement, we could do 
it in a much smaller form? No, the excessiveness is 
a way to demonstrate attention, draw attention, 
to make sure that the redundancy is built in, the 
elaborateness is built in, so that the sacred gets its 
due. (Link to video is on page 205.)
terrace and then follows near 
the forest edge before climbing 
again to higher ground where 
the earthworks are revealed in 
all their breadth and majesty. 
An arrangement of cut stones 
now defines an observation 
point overlooking the site and 
the wide Scioto Valley. Com-
pared with Mound City, Hope-
ton apparently had a different 
yet complementary function: 
Its large circle and square, two 
smaller circles, and parallel 
walls were not associated with 
burials nor preceded by sub-
stantial ceremonial buildings.
History. Construction methods 
and sequences have been more 
thoroughly studied here than at 
any other Hopewell earthwork; combinations of soil types and col-
ors, for example, were extraordinarily complex. Following the end 
of Hopewell practices, the forest returned until it was cleared for 
farming in the very early 1800s. Agriculture continued for nearly 
two centuries, and by the late 1900s its increasingly destructive 
methods had diminished the earthen walls to today’s subtle pro-
files. The site joined the National Park when it was founded in 1992, 
and visitor facilities opened in 2007. Viewed from the high terrace 
overlook, the mowing pattern maintained by the park vividly por-
trays the earthwork’s scope and form.
1 Glacial Terraces. The clearly terraced structure of this valley  
results from the eons of action by the preglacial Teays River. 
The parking lot is on the first terrace—­now the Scioto’s floodplain. 
The earthworks stand on the second terrace where the older, much
larger, north-­flowing river laid down deep, gravelly subsoils. All the 
geometric earthworks occupy the equivalent of this level in their re-
spective valleys, well beyond the flood levels of the current rivers. 


--- PDF PAGE 46 ---

76
77
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: EAST
3 Preserved Wall. Private owners farmed 
the Hopeton Earthworks for nearly 200 
years, running their plows right over 
the walls and gradually wearing them 
down. The destruction accelerated in the 
mid-­twentieth century with the advent of ever more powerful farm 
equipment, to the point where even the walls of the square, once 
12 feet tall, are now discernable only with some effort—­their soils 
spread out in both directions on the land. A section of the wall where 
the square and circle overlap stands today much more prominently 
than the rest because it was incorporated into a fence line and thus 
escaped the plow.
4 Remote Sensing Discoveries. Despite this agricultural degrada-
tion, old aerial photographs show the earthworks clearly, some 
with traces of the now-­lost parallel walls heading for the river-
bank. Light detection and ranging (LiDAR) images reveal the ex-
tent to which the shapes remain today, but most dramatic are the 
magnetometry maps created by the National Park Service and the 
Deutsches Archäologisches Institut from 2012 to 2017. They clearly 
show the foundations of the original walls, plus the evenly spaced 
postholes along the interior of the circle’s embankment wall—­
apparently the remains of a 1,000-­foot diameter woodhenge, the 
largest yet known.
5 Parallel Walls. From outside the northwest corner of the square, 
the Park’s differential planting program shows a section of the 
parallel walls that once led to the edge of the terrace. Parallel-­
walled roadways like this once existed at several other Hopewell 
sites (Newark, Fort Ancient, Portsmouth), but this is now the best 
place to envision the strange effect of these low (maybe 3 feet high) 
walls, nearly 200 feet apart, running parallel for thousands of feet. 
This broad roadway’s southwesterly orientation aligns toward the 
winter solstice sunset. From the same vantage point, the diagonal 
view back across the corners of the square aligns to where the Sun 
would have risen on that same winter solstice day. Solstice align-
ments across diagonals of squares also occur at Mound City, Seip 
Earthworks, and the Hopewell Mound Group.
(above) Magnetometry surveys of the 
Hopeton Earthworks revealed the evenly 
spaced postholes of a giant woodhenge 
corresponding to its large circle.
A 1938 aerial photo shows the outlines of 
Hopeton’s circle and square plus, at the 
lower left, remnants of the parallel walls.
6 Wall Construction. Returning toward the parking area along the 
western side of the square, the wall’s topographic relief becomes 
somewhat clearer at close range, especially where the old farm road 
crosses over it. Hopeton is the most thoroughly studied of the major 
Hopewell earthworks, with many years of targeted excavation pro-
grams by the National Park Service. Thanks to work led by archaeolo-
gist Mark Lynott, much is known about the processes of earthen wall 
construction. The people scraped away the topsoil and built fires on 
the prepared surface. Then they brought in soils of at least two con-
trasting colors—­yellowish for the core of the wall and its interior sur-
face, and a thick layer of reddish loam along the exterior face. Very 
similar color contrasts between interior and exterior have been de-
tected at other Hopewell earthworks, including Newark’s Great Circle.
EN ROUTE TO LANCASTER
Between the Hopeton Earthworks and the northern end of the Logan Range, State 
Route 159 heads northeast. This area would have been the likely terminus of a long, 
straight, ancient roadway connecting the earthworks around Chillicothe with those 
at Newark nearly sixty miles to the northeast. As far as Lancaster, skirting the edge 
of the unglaciated hills, it also approximates Zane’s Trace, the historic pioneer route.
From Shawnee Land to Statehood. Major Indigenous trails con-
verged on the distinctive landscapes of the central Scioto Valley, 
one of them approximating the probable ancient route from here 
to Newark now called the Great Hopewell Road. From their villages 
nearby, the Shawnee undoubtedly understood the clustered hills of 
the Logan Range as significant landmarks, and the concentration 
(left) In 2002, an excavation trench 
exposed the clear contrast between 
the yellow and red soils in the wall of 
Hopeton’s square.


--- PDF PAGE 47 ---

78
79
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
connected the Hopewell era’s 
two most important ritual cen-
ters along a perfectly straight 
alignment—­even 
if 
the 
low 
earthen walls (at less than 3 feet 
high and nearly 200 feet apart) 
are now largely untraceable or 
were maybe never finished.
Zane’s Trace. In 1796, Congress awarded an American Revolution-
ary War veteran, Colonel Ebenezer Zane, the contract to open a 
road from Wheeling, West Virginia (then part of Virginia) to Lime-
stone (now Maysville, Kentucky), to encourage settlement and to 
provide an alternative to the Ohio River route. In exchange for his 
road-­building services, Colonel Zane was given land parcels where 
the route crossed the major rivers—­at Zanesville (the Muskingum), 
Lancaster (the Hocking), and Chillicothe (the Scioto). Initially 
just a path in the forest defined mainly by felled trees, the route 
followed established Indigenous trails as much as possible. The 
newly formed state of Ohio began improvements to the route 
after 1803. The stretch approaching Chillicothe from Lancaster 
skirts the hilly edges of the Appalachian Plateau, and from south 
of Kingston it probably corresponds with today’s Marietta Road—­
aiming for Zane’s ferry crossing about where the Bridge Street 
bridge is today.
Tarlton Village. Halfway between Chillicothe and Lancaster along 
this route is one of Ohio’s oldest settlements. The village of Tarl-
ton was founded in 1801 as Newellstown, a principal stop on Zane’s 
Trace, making it one of the earliest commercial and lodging des-
tinations in the area. By 1816, the village had been renamed after 
General Banastre Tarleton, whose British troops were routed by the 
Americans in a 1781 Revolutionary War battle in South Carolina. 
Nye’s Tavern, a two-­story brick building dating from 1840, was an 
important commercial hub; the building still stands along the main 
street near the Zane’s Trace historical marker.
TECUMSEH’S CALL FOR UNITY
Will we not soon be driven from our respective countries and the graves of our 
ancestors? Will not the bones of our dead be plowed up, and their graves be 
turned into fields? . . . Shall we give up our homes, our country, bequeathed 
to us by the Great Spirit, the graves of our dead, and everything that is dear 
and sacred to us, without a struggle? I know you will cry with me: Never! 
Never! Then let us by unity of action destroy them all.
—­Tecumseh, Shawnee Leader
A historical marker in the village 
of Tarlton commemorates its 
importance along Zane’s Trace, 
the pioneer route from Pennsylvania 
into Ohio and Kentucky.
of ancient monuments in the vicinity as revered works of the An-
cestors. Centuries earlier, those same hills may have helped inspire 
the earthworks, as the winter view from Mound City’s matching 
profiles seems to suggest. And for the new American settlers and 
their leaders, with their visions of the West and statehood, that 
range of hills symbolized new beginnings—­even as it was soon to 
mean the end for the tribes then living here.
Great Seal State Park. That prominent 
mountain profile is now preserved within a 
1,682-­acre state park (4908 Marietta Rd., Chilli- 
cothe) commemorating Thomas Worthing-
ton and his friends’ inspiration for their new 
state’s official seal. These high sandstone hills 
are laced with twenty-­three miles of hiking, 
biking, and bridle trails. Their upper reaches 
provide views out to the west and north over 
Ohio’s flat, glaciated plains as far as Columbus 
on a clear day, and to the east and south across 
the rugged, forested hills of the Appalachian 
Plateau.
The Great Hopewell Road. The route from here to Newark approx-
imates the probable Great Hopewell Road, an ancient route sug-
gested by recorded remains near its northern end (see pages 96–97). 
In the 1990s, Ohio History Connection archaeologist Brad Lepper 
discovered a nineteenth-­century description confirming at least 
six miles of perfectly straight, parallel embankments extending 
from Newark’s Octagon and aiming precisely for Chillicothe. With 
additional evidence, including 1930s aerial photography and very 
recent LiDAR data, he has hypothesized that a processional way 
A historical marker in the state 
park explains the evolution and 
symbolism of the Great Seal of  
the State of Ohio.


--- PDF PAGE 48 ---

80
81
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: EAST
Tarlton Cross Mound. A shady parking and picnic area north of  
Tarlton village (11615 16th Rd. SW, Stoutsville) is maintained by the 
Fairfield County Park District and open daily from dawn to dusk.  
A small concrete bridge from the Depression-­era Civilian Conser-
vation Corps spans the stream before the path climbs up a wooded 
ridge. The 90-­foot unique earthwork has the shape of a plus sign. 
Its presumed Hopewell origin has not been fully confirmed. The 
design is oddly positioned at the edge of a narrow, sloping ridge, 
and seems to have been shaped in an unusual way by the subtrac-
tion as well as the addition of soil. The downslope was formed by 
the removal of the dirt around it, which was then used to build up 
the cross. Just to the southwest stand four mounds (now mostly  
obscured among the trees) 
forming a perfect square, 
260 feet on its diagonals—­
roughly one-­quarter of the 
standard Hopewell dimen-
sion of 1,054 feet.
The plus-­sign-­shaped Tarlton Cross Mound is reached via a 1930s-­era concrete suspension 
bridge over a quiet stream.
The tall-­pillared Georgian Museum is perhaps the grandest of the many grand nineteenth-­
century mansions on the hill above Lancaster’s downtown.
Squier and Davis illustrated 
Tarlton’s Cross Mound in 1848, 
showing some of the outlying 
mounds later discovered 
to form a square.
LANCASTER
Lancaster’s historic center presents an unusual number of opulent 
public buildings and palatial houses, reflecting the town’s prodigious 
past as a transport hub and economic power—­most notably in the 
glass industry.
History and Setting. This beautiful small city was established by 
Ebenezer Zane in 1800, where his ferry carried travelers on his new 
road across the Hocking River. A Wyandotte Indigenous village pre-
ceding it on the site was the home of their well-­known Chief Tarhe, 
called “The Crane.” Many of the early settlers here were the Penn-
sylvania Dutch arriving from Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and they 
transplanted the name. The early days saw signs and newspapers in 
both English and German, and a variety of craft businesses. Canals 
heading west (toward Columbus, 1834) and south (to Athens, 1841) 
spurred growth, which the railroad accelerated after 1854. 


--- PDF PAGE 49 ---

82
83
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
Lancaster became a center of glass production, and the home of 
the Anchor Hocking glassware company since 1905. Surrounding 
roads in Fairfield County lead to many historical sites, scenic parks, 
and covered bridges. For visitor information, consult the county’s 
official tourism website (Visit Fairfield County) or stop in their of-
fices at 129 North Broad Street.
Historic Center. The city of Lancaster has a pleasant downtown dis-
trict with many shops, several important museums and historic 
houses, and very impressive public buildings. As one of the orig-
inal Zane’s Trace settlements, and like the much smaller village of 
Somerset (see page 191), it was laid out in the distinctive Pennsyl-
vania manner, with its town square formed by leaving open the 
corners of four adjacent city blocks. Downtown Lancaster has an 
unusually rich collection of fine historic house museums on the 
hills of Main and Wheeling Streets, all within easy walking distance 
of each other and the square. The neighborhood streets are lined 
with many more excellent historic houses.
Three House Museums. The Georgian Museum is a large, period-­
furnished mansion (105 East Wheeling St.) dating from 1832, with 
impressive woodwork and chandeliers, a three-­story cantilevered 
spiral staircase, and interesting antique collections. The Decora-
tive Arts Center of Ohio is a regionally significant arts museum 
housed in the 1835 Reese-­Peters House (145 East Main St.)—­a large, 
The beautiful Reese-­Peters House is now 
home to the Decorative Arts Center of Ohio, 
an important art museum.
Early nineteenth-­century mansions often 
featured cantilevered spiral staircases, like 
this one in Lancaster’s 
Reese-­Peters House.
beautiful, innovative Greek Revival masterwork. Besides perma-
nent collections, it presents temporary exhibitions and art educa-
tion programs. Lancaster’s most famous son, the Civil War general 
William Tecumseh Sherman, was born at what is now the Sherman 
House Museum (137 East Main St.), whose wood-­framed core dates 
from 1811; later brick additions showcase period furnishings and 
Civil War memorabilia. Also in Lancaster’s historic downtown, the 
Ohio Glass Museum (124 West Main St.) offers exhibits on the his-
tory of glassmaking both globally and locally, and showcases works 
and demonstrations by current glass artists.
Stonewall Cemetery. About two miles southwest of downtown Lan-
caster (2375 Stonewall Cemetery Road SW, Lancaster) stands one 
of the most unusual structures in all of Ohio. The huge, chamfered 
blocks forming this open-­air dodecagon’s dry-­laid sandstone walls 
are a marvel of craftsmanship. The tiny park is open dawn to dusk; 
the iron gate is usually kept closed but affords views of the inte-
rior. Nathaniel Wilson began construction of the seven-­foot-­high 
enclosure in 1828, and it was completed by his son after his death. 
The inscription over the entrance refers to Wilson as “one of the 
early Pioneers of the West, who 
emigrated from Cumberland 
County Pennsylvania and set-
tled near this place AD 1798, 
when all around was one con-
tinued and uninhabited wil-
derness.” Of course, Ohio was 
already inhabited, but that was 
not always the earliest settlers’ 
perception.
TO THE HOCKING ROUTE
Heading southeast out of Lancaster reaches the many natural wonders of Ohio’s 
Hocking Hills region, including the diverse natural areas of a multi-­unit state park, 
many picturesque tourism accommodations, and the historic towns of Logan and 
Nelsonville. Beyond are Athens, founded in 1801 as the home of Ohio University, and 
two villages with significant mounds—­Zaleski and The Plains (see map, page 174).
The precision-­crafted, 
12-­sided sandstone enclosure of 
Stonewall Cemetery, just outside 
Lancaster, is unique in Ohio.


--- PDF PAGE 50 ---

84
85
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
The exquisite Greek Revival Avery-­Downer House 
graces Broadway in the picturesque 
New England–­flavored college town of Granville.
The Alligator Mound, above Granville, emerges best from its hilltop site under low-­angled sunlight.
BUCKEYE LAKE
The Buckeye Lake resort area hugs the northwestern shores of the 
huge reservoir built as the high-­point gravity feeder for the Ohio 
and Erie Canal; its waters filled the canal both south to the  
Ohio River and north to Lake Erie.
Millersport. This small village, located just a bit east of State Route 
37 between Lancaster and Granville, was laid out in 1825 adjacent to 
the canal system’s new Licking Summit Reservoir (as Buckeye Lake 
was originally called). For the reservoir to feed the south-­flowing 
canal, workers had to cut a two-­mile-­long, sixty-­foot-­deep trench 
through the ridge south of town. Its arrow-­straight course remains 
one of early Ohio’s most impressive engineering feats. Deep Cut 
Road parallels this marvel, which is now wooded so visible only 
in winter. With its canal-­side position, the town of Millersport be-
came an important trading center. A well-­preserved section of the 
canal (on its way to the Deep Cut) 
runs through the center of town 
today, serving its new role as a 
fishing resort on Buckeye Lake. 
(For more on Ohio’s canal system, 
see Circleville’s Canal Park, page 
151.)
Buckeye Lake History. The new, the old, and the odd characterize 
the settlements along the constructed northern embankment of 
Buckeye Lake. The long history of this high-­ground reservoir be-
gins in the early 1800s when swamps here were drained and lined 
partially with huge limestone slabs taken from a large American 
Indian mound nearby. This was the highest point on the Ohio and 
Erie Canal, 317 feet above Lake Erie and 413 feet above the Ohio 
River. This meant, with the completion of the Deep Cut, that grav-
ity could feed water through the entire canal in both directions. By 
1900, the canals had been long abandoned, but there were lively 
amusement parks along the lakeshore. A state park and historical 
museum now tell the stories, and boat tours take visitors to the 
lake’s famed Cranberry Bogs.
GRANVILLE
This small college town was founded 
by New Englanders eager to create an 
environment that would help them 
feel at home; its exquisite historical 
ambience is very well preserved.
Historic Center. Broadway in Granville blends the character of a New 
England village, a college town, and an old Midwestern main street, 
with charming ambience, good shops, and cafés. The exceptional 
architecture includes the Greek Revival masterpiece Avery-­Downer 
House (now the Robbins Hunter Museum, 221 East Broadway), and 
several beautiful churches include at least one in a proper New  
England mode. Either of two excellent historic lodgings—­the Gran-
ville Inn or the Buxton Inn—­can provide a pleasant base for visiting 
all of central Ohio. Granville is also the home of Denison Univer-
sity, occupying the prominent hilltop above the village with its  
meandering drives and imposing academic buildings.
Alligator Mound. The greatest animal effigy mound in Ohio after 
Serpent Mound crowns a hill just east of Granville. Preserved by 
the Ohio History Connection, it is now supplied with a histori-
cal marker (across from 388 Bryn Du Dr., Granville). The crea-
ture sprawls across the grassy summit of a residential cul-­de-­sac 
at the end of a long, winding lane. The subtle undulations of the  
creature’s head and paws are best seen in the deep shadows of very 
early or very late sunlight. Coming out of the animal’s side is an 
The artificial valley called the “Deep Cut” 
carries the canal through a two-­mile-­
wide ridge south of Millersport.


--- PDF PAGE 51 ---

86
87
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
UNDERWATER PANTHER
This earthen creature with four rounded feet and a long, curling tail 
became known to early settlers as the “alligator,” but there are more likely 
possibilities for what it represented to the Indigenous people who created 
it. The spiraling tail closely resembles that of its Adams County counterpart, 
Serpent Mound, suggesting it may be instead the Underwater Panther who, 
like the Great Serpent, was a powerful creature of the watery Beneath World 
of American Indian cosmology. The Underwater Panther was said to have 
dark, dangerous powers, and a long tail that could unleash canoe-­swamping 
whirlpools.
NAMING GRANVILLE’S ALLIGATOR
Archaeologist Brad Lepper suggests how a conversation between an 
early settler and a Native person might have given Granville’s Alligator 
its improbable name: What if one of those pioneers had asked a Native 
American what that was. And if that Native American had used their own 
term—­the Ojibway term is “Mishewayshee”—­for Underwater Panther, and 
the European American was still struggling with 
the language and was like, “Underwater panther? 
Panthers don’t live underwater. What do you 
mean?” And if the Native American had said, “That 
spirit, that creature that lives in the water with a 
long tail and sometimes eats people,” the European 
would have said, “Oh, you mean an alligator!” 
(Link to video is on page 205.)
elevated, stone-­covered circle—­an altar where many fires burned. 
The views from this hilltop extend westward to the open plains be-
yond Granville, and eastward into the defined valley terraces where 
the Newark Earthworks were laid out. The builders of the effigy no 
doubt appreciated the prominence of this spot in encompassing the 
dual ecologies, and especially the nearby geometric earthworks—­
already 800 years old when this effigy was begun.
NEWARK
Today, the seat of Licking County surrounds the confluence of three 
upper tributaries of the Muskingum River. In antiquity, this valley 
held the largest geometric earthwork complex in the world. Two of 
its most majestic features survive.
History and Setting. The city of Newark was first settled in 1802, 
after General William Schenck surveyed the land for Revolution-
ary War veterans John and George Burnett and John Cummings 
as part of the United States Military District—­a land-­bestowing ar-
rangement for veterans similar to the Virginia Military District in 
southwest Ohio. Schenck named the place after his hometown of 
Newark, New Jersey. The town’s economy grew rapidly after 1825, 
with the construction of the Ohio and Erie Canal and its nearby 
Licking Summit Reservoir (Buckeye Lake).
Historic Downtown. Newark’s historic center is anchored by a 
well-­preserved Courthouse Square, with a good selection of shops 
and restaurants nearby. The former Home Building Association 
Bank—­a tiny jewel of a building from 1915—­is one of eight banks 
across the Midwest designed by the internationally famous early 
modern architect Louis Sullivan (1 North Third St.). Nearby, The 
Works Museum (55 South First St.) tells the history of Newark and 
its immediate region, from its earliest times (flint mining and 
mastodons) to its robust industrial and glassmaking heritage as the 
home of Heisey Glass and Owens Corning. Glassblowing demon-
strations and regular planetarium shows reinforce the museum’s 
science and industry themes. Information on the many attractions 
and accommodations in Licking 
County is available from the vis-
itor bureau’s office or the Explore 
Licking County website.
Exhibits in downtown Newark’s 
Works Museum tell the city’s stories, 
with special emphasis on its 
industrial and glassmaking heritage.


--- PDF PAGE 52 ---

88
89
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
Two brothers named Salisbury made the most accurate survey of the Newark Earthworks 
in 1862, not long before most of the site’s features disappeared.
THE SALISBURY BROTHERS
James and Charles Salisbury surveyed the Newark Earthworks at the time 
of the American Civil War. Brad Lepper explains who they were: James and 
Charles Salisbury were interesting, and we know quite a lot about James, 
very little about Charles, other than he was James’s brother. Dr. James 
Salisbury was a physician and was wildly famous and popular for having a 
fad diet called the Salisbury diet, which consisted of drinking a lot of boiled 
water and eating a lot of protein—­meat. He invented Salisbury steak in fact. 
He . . . was a Civil War doctor; many of his patients were former veterans 
of the Civil War who’d subsisted on a steady diet of 
hardtack and coffee, and their digestive systems 
had been ravaged. So he invented Salisbury steak 
as sort of an easily digestible form of diet for them, 
but it became very popular of course. We all get 
Salisbury steak today. So he was a physician, but a 
dedicated antiquarian. And many of the dedicated 
antiquarians of this period were physicians, for one 
reason or another. (Link to video is on page 205.)
The Cherry Valley. When the first settlers came to this area around 
1800, they found huge numbers of mature cherry trees. Within 
a few generations, the trees had all been harvested and sent to 
Cincinnati to be turned into furniture, but the question remains 
how this concentration came to be. Cherries may have been part 
of the ancient feasts and ceremonies that brought people here to 
the earthworks. Perhaps they were grown here for that purpose, 
or they proliferated from celebrants disposing of the pits—­thereby 
seeding the huge groves that thrived for centuries. Though the 
trees are gone, the “Cherry Valley” name now applies to roads and 
businesses, including a very pleasant resort hotel.
The Newark Earthworks. The level plain southwest of downtown, 
across Raccoon Creek, was once covered by more than four square 
miles of elaborate and precise earthen architecture—­the largest geo-
metric earthwork complex in the world. Enormous enclosures were 
connected by walled roadways and linked to the surrounding water-
ways. Finding them buried in the forests, awed settlers described, 
measured, and mapped these mysterious monuments throughout 
the 1800s, even as most were being taken down for the growth of 
the town, its industries, and its infrastructure. But thanks to the fore-
sight of the town’s citizens, two of the most impressive features from 
ancient Newark remain today—­the Great Circle and the Octagon 
Earthworks—­helping visitors grasp the literally unbelievable scope, 
beauty, and precision of this unique ancient landscape. The impact 
of these monuments on visitors today is still stunning; they create an 
architectural experience like no other on Earth.
The Ancient Landscape. Mature oak-­hickory forests covered most of 
Ohio in antiquity and up to the time of settlement. But excavations 
at the Great Circle and other earthwork sites have shown that large 
prairie openings were also here, both naturally and with human 
maintenance. Open spaces would have been an essential feature of 
earthwork sites—­to facilitate any astronomical sightings as well as 
earthmoving and construction. Open prairie landscapes may have 
extended across the Newark area for hundreds or thousands of years 
before the earthworks. All hunter-­gatherer societies know that main-
taining such openings increases plant diversity, and the density and 
variety of game animals. A naturally occurring wetland in the center 
of town (still detectable as low-­lying land between the Octagon and 
Great Circle) would also have helped keep the forest at bay.


--- PDF PAGE 53 ---

90
91
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route
The Octagon’s huge interior is formed by eight perfectly straight, perfectly eye-­level walls.
Every 18.6 years, the Moon returns to its northernmost rising position, aligned with the 
central axis of Newark’s Octagon Earthworks.
OCTAGON EARTHWORKS
This huge perfect circle and adjoining open-­cornered octagon were 
built with precise geometries and level, artificial horizons—­used in 
antiquity to mark the complex movements in the positions of moon-
rises and moonsets over an 18.6-­year cycle.
Orientation. A small residential lane off North 30th Street leads to a 
parking area (125 North 33rd St., upper left on the Salisbury map), 
situated between the long walls of this astonishing site’s Observatory 
Circle and Octagon. The site is open during daylight hours, and a for-
mer golf clubhouse serves as the Ohio History Connection’s visitor 
center. A thorough walk of the grounds will take at least one hour. 
From the elevated viewing platform near the parking area, follow the 
giant circle to the left, as far as the Observatory Mound—­the point 
from which the most important lunar alignment occurs along the 
site’s principal axis. The Octagon’s elegant, level-­topped walls and 
open gateways wrap the opposite end of the site, as far as the terraces 
dropping toward Raccoon Creek, and all the way to 30th Street.
History. As the Hopewell architects’ most geometrically refined 
achievement, the Octagon Earthworks may be among the last of 
their projects. But within a few generations, the moonrise align-
ment vistas to which it is calibrated would have been engulfed  
by the returning forest. When the first colonial settlers came into 
the area around 1800, the local tribes, many just recently arrived in 
Ohio, knew or told little about these strange tree-­covered earthen 
lines. From the beginning, their mystery and size fascinated some 
Newark citizens, but many people only wanted to loot the mounds, 
or cut them down to build houses or factories. The Octagon was 
one of two major parts of the earthworks preserved by the citizens 
of Newark as public lands considered adaptable to other uses; the 
Octagon became a state militia camp briefly, and then a golf course 
for over a century.


--- PDF PAGE 54 ---

92
93
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
THE MOONRISE EXPERIENCE
Fall 2005 offered the first opportunity for anyone to witness an axial 
moonrise at the Octagon following its discovery. Newark historian Jeff 
Gill describes the experience of being there: We went out, and I’ve got to 
tell you, we had been anticipating that moment for over fifteen years. And 
it still made the hair on the back of my neck go up to actually see the Moon 
rise, and to stop and think: We don’t normally watch moonrises. The Sun, 
we know when it rises, and it gives clear notice of its coming. The moonrise 
is a completely different beast: It sneaks up on you, and you don’t know 
it’s happening, unless somehow you know it’s 
happening and even then, when it happens, it’s just 
“ohh.” And so there we stood, there on the central 
alignment, and looking along where those walls 
said to us, whispered across the centuries: “There it 
will happen.” And when it did, it was just one of the 
most memorable moments of my life. (Link to video 
is on page 205.)
REGAINING ANCIENT KNOWLEDGE
Two professors from Earlham College, Ray Hively and Robert Horn, 
rediscovered the Octagon’s alignments in 1974, albeit inadvertently. They 
surveyed the site expecting to find solar alignments but instead found only 
the lunar ones—­all eight of them. The Moon’s long, complex cycle was not so 
thoroughly encoded by any other ancient monument on Earth. Ray Hively 
describes the significance of this achievement: The fact that this structure 
simultaneously encodes geometrical and astronomical information is an 
astounding and highly motivating discovery for any society that makes it. Even 
today, modern physicists are motivated in a sense by the same kind of dual de-
sire: that is, the desire, the passion in fact, to find a correspondence between 
mathematical symmetry and natural phenomena. That is a very powerful 
discovery, and I think that we’re dealing with something like that here.
1 Viewing Platform. A small, elevated platform near the park-
ing lot offers an orientation to the site, with explanatory signage 
and views over the earthen walls into the avenue connecting the 
giant Observatory Circle (at left) with the open-­cornered Octagon 
(at right). The precision of the walls is readily apparent, with their 
level crests and perfect profiles. The circle’s 1,054-­foot diameter is 
exact to within inches for its entire circumference. The dimensions 
of the two figures are perfectly harmonized: A square with sides 
equal to the circle’s diameter would fit exactly within the octagon’s 
four axial and cross-­axial gateways; another pinpoints the centers 
of four of its mounds. The circle may be entered through a modern 
entrance adjacent to the visitor center building.
2 Observatory Mound. The once-­in-­a-­generation moonrise align-
ment explains the position of Observatory Mound at the end of 
the site’s main axis. Yet it sits atop an unusual detail: Two halves of 
the circle don’t quite meet; instead they curve gently and appear to 
slide beneath the mound, emerging on the outside as small twin 
tails. The form suggests that a former en-
trance gateway—­a smaller-­scale version of 
the one at the Great Circle across town—­
was at some point covered over by the 
large mound, leaving only a small notch.
The Long Lunar Cycle. The movements of the Moon are complex. 
Nowadays, we notice that the Moon has different phases over about 
twenty-­nine days. But the builders of the earthworks noticed much 
more complicated lunar patterns: About every four weeks its ris-
ing position swings back and forth between the southeast and the 
northeast, but the width of that angle expands very slowly over 
about nine and one-­third years, and then contracts again at the 
same rate. The Moon’s setting position moves the same way across 
the western horizon. This creates eight points where the moonrise 
or set position appears to reverse direction, and all eight are marked 
precisely by these earthen walls and gateways. The northernmost 
moonrise aligns with the long central axis of the Circle and Octagon 
over a few consecutive months every 18.6 years. The design tells us 
this was probably their grandest and most anticipated festival.
Squier and Davis’s drawing of the Observatory Mound  
illustrates its apparent imposition over an earlier gateway.


--- PDF PAGE 55 ---

94
95
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
the adjacent Octagon; and to set 
many dimensions at other sites 
throughout the region.
4 Raccoon Creek Terraces. The far northernmost sides of the Octa-
gon offer clear views of the natural terraces stepping down to Rac-
coon Creek. The geometric earthworks of the Ohio Valley region 
were always built on these high second terraces above the rivers, 
providing perfectly level surfaces atop well-­drained, gravelly soils. 
The steep, exposed slopes between the terraces suggest that the 
people came here for easy access to the soil needed to build the 
earthworks: Instead of digging it up out of holes, they could just 
pull it off the steep hillside into their baskets.
5 Octagon Gateways. The distance across the Octagon is even 
greater than that of the Observatory Circle, so viewing from one 
gateway to its opposite can be a perceptual stretch, especially with 
today’s trees, or when the air is hazy. Yet sighting along these walls, 
and across the space to the horizons beyond, was a major function 
of the site. At the Octagon’s cleverly designed gateways, the preci-
sion of this monumental architecture is at its most apparent: eight 
perfectly flat-­topped, slightly taller mounds block the vistas out-
ward from each of the Octagon’s open corners. We are both con-
tained and released, with subtle shifts in these effects as we move 
around the interior.
Geometric Precision. Geometrical 
harmonies exist not only between 
the Octagon and its connected 
circle, but farther out across the 
Newark complex as a whole. The 
centers of the Observatory Circle 
GRANDMOTHER MOON
Nipahuma, our mother who goes by night, the first mother, the mother of all 
mothers, nurtured her children, and then when her purpose was complete 
she returned to the spirit world; but before she left she told first man and 
woman that she would never forget them. She continues to watch over us at 
night as the Moon. The children promised to remember Grandmother Moon 
whenever she appeared in the Sky.
—­Hitakonanu’laxk, Lenape Storyteller
The Moon is a woman. We identify her as “she.” One of the Canadian sisters 
has taught me that when our people go, our females, and that Moon is full, 
they’re dancing around the Moon. And that’s when we have our ceremony, 
and we talk to them, and we send them our prayers, so they can take them on 
to the Creator. But every time I see the full Moon, I think about, you know, our 
Ancestors—­my mother and all of them, dancing around the Moon. And that’s 
a good thought, a good thought.
—­Linda Poolaw, Delaware Grand Council Chief
The Octagon’s main axis and one of its walls 
are aligned to the Moon’s northern and 
southern maximum rise-­points; other key 
lunar rise and set positions are aligned along 
other walls and between gateways.
The Octagon Earthworks’ perfect geometry 
is harmonized by a dimension of 1,054 feet—­
the Observatory Circle’s diameter—­a unit 
widely used in Hopewell earthworks and 
abbreviated today as the “OCD.”
3 Observatory Circle. Continuing along the northern rim of the 
circle toward the parallel-­walled avenue linking it to the Octagon, 
views across the circle’s interior emphasize its vast size and re-
markable precision. To lay out such large circles, the ancient ar-
chitects must have had some very long radius cords. The one used 
here (doubled to the diameter of 1,054 feet), or others matching it, 
apparently got a lot of use—­to set the position and main corners of 
Two walls form one of the 
Octagon’s gateways, with its interior mound 
on the left; on the right is the small circle.


--- PDF PAGE 56 ---

96
97
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
ANCIENT GENIUS
The people who built these mounds were brilliant. Their genius lies in 
combining complexity and simplicity simultaneously. Their mathematical 
and astronomical complexities challenge our mental capacity, while 
simultaneously their simple (forms) evoke a calming, soothing, and in some 
instances spiritual effect.
—­Glenna J. Wallace, Chief of the Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma
An aerial view of Newark’s Great Circle Earthworks under winter snow reveals its central 
mound and its large gateway at the upper right.
and the Great Circle are six OCD’s apart, as are the centers of the 
octagon and the square. Imaginary parallel lines joined the corners 
of the square and those of the octagon, more than a mile away. In-
credibly, these two sets of long parallels also point to the minimum 
and maximum southern moonrises. Circles and squares also share 
matching areas and perimeters. These startling relationships re-
veal a deep mastery of empirical geometry, and they suggest the 
whole complex may have been conceived according to a single uni-
fying idea rather than through incremental additions.
6 Small Circle. The southeastern gate of the Octagon opens near 
a beautiful small circular enclosure, the best-­preserved earthwork 
of its kind. It likely corresponds to the plan of a preceding timber 
structure—­perhaps a woodhenge, or an arbor like the one found at 
Fort Hill (see page 146). Nineteenth-­century plans of the Newark 
complex show many such small circles, especially along the road 
that headed east from the Octagon. Surviving low embankment 
walls (nearby next to 30th St.) once continued into a passage con-
necting the Octagon with the square—­part of the complete system 
of low walls surrounding and linking all the major components of 
the Newark complex.
7 The Great Hopewell Road. The wall fragment nearest the small 
circle is the beginning of another road. As shown on the Salisbury 
map, it made a couple quick bends and then headed off in a per-
fectly straight alignment to the southwest toward Chillicothe—­the 
Hopewell culture’s other greatest ritual center—­probably arriv-
ing somewhere between the Hopeton Earthworks and the Logan 
Range. Brad Lepper’s hypothesis that this was a pilgrimage route 
was inspired by his discovery of the Salisbury brothers’ 1862 map 
and their accompanying description, in which they told of having 
followed the pair of earthen lines for at least six miles from this 
spot. Other nineteenth-­century witnesses recorded them for even 
longer distances and always aligned in the same precise direc-
tion—­an “undeviating course” as the Salisburys put it.
GREAT CIRCLE EARTHWORKS
Standing majestically in a peaceful city park, this gigantic circu-
lar enclosure and its grand gateway are enhanced by a continuous 
inner ditch, doubling their apparent height, and by a beautifully 
undulating mound in the center.
Orientation. City streets connect the Octagon Earthworks with the 
Great Circle, about a mile away (455 Hebron Rd., Heath; bottom 
center on the Salisbury map). The park is open daylight hours 
and has three parking areas. For the small museum’s open times, 
check the Ohio History Connection’s website. The main southeast-
ern parking lot lies between two giant borrow pits—­the sources of 


--- PDF PAGE 57 ---

98
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
The Great Circle’s monumental gateway platform is framed by the site’s tallest walls and 
deepest ditches.
much of the soil used to build the earthwork. A paved path rises 
toward the museum, directly opposite the Great Circle’s monumen-
tal gateway. In the circle’s center is a symmetrical mound with two 
wings, called “Eagle Mound.” In the open parkland to the north and 
east are two reconstructed segments of the low walls that once sur-
rounded the entire Newark complex.
History. The circle’s design is typical of many earlier Adena earth-
works—­a ring with an interior ditch and gateway toward the east—­
suggesting it may be the oldest element of the Newark complex. 
From its first recorded sighting by American settlers, the Great 
Circle has been marveled at, preserved, and renamed, through 
uses both recreational and military. Early settlers called it the Old 
Fort when they found it in the forest, although when Caleb Atwater 
described it in 1820, he astutely noted that having the “moat” on 
the inside would not be much help for defense. Soon after, it be-
came the Licking County Fairgrounds and was later used to muster 
troops for the Civil War. Spectacles continued into the early twenti-
eth century. In the 1930s, the Civilian Conservation Corps removed 
the amusement park structures and restored the earthworks to 
their mid-­1800s dimensions.
1 Museum and Bronze Model. The 1970s museum building stands 
on the axis of the circle and faces it across a small plaza, where a 
bronze tabletop model depicts the Newark Earthworks complex as 
mapped by Squier and Davis in the 1840s. It helps visitors connect 
what they are seeing (the grand gateway of the Great Circle) with 
the entire four-­square-­mile scope of the ancient complex, includ-
ing the surviving fragment of the square and the Octagon Earth-
works across town. The museum offers a mural, interactive video 
program, and other interpretive materials.
2 Grand Gateway. From the museum’s small plaza, the monumen-
tal entrance to the Great Circle presents a dramatic scene. Here, 
people coming from other parts of the complex, along the several 
parallel-­walled roadways, would enter one of the most dramatic 
entry portals anywhere in their cultural world—­a grand act of pas-
sage preparing them for the ceremonies at the circle’s heart. Pass-
ing across this platform, between the site’s tallest walls and deepest 
ditches, creates a monumental threshold experience comparable 
to or even exceeding Fort Ancient’s South Gate.


--- PDF PAGE 58 ---

100
101
World Heritage Route: EAST
World Heritage Route: EAST
SPIRIT BARRIERS
Robert Hall, in his 1997 book, An Archaeology of the Soul: North American 
Indian Belief and Ritual, describes the widespread Indigenous tradition 
that water can block the passage of spirits—­souls of the dead or other 
manifestations are considered unable to pass through or over water. Water 
formed into a circular shape (as at the Great Circle), or along a boundary 
(as at Fort Ancient), could be especially powerful and provide a protected 
zone. Part of the water’s effectiveness may also have been its reflective 
surface: Taboos about mirrors that can capture a spirit or soul are 
widespread across many global cultures.
Water-­Filled Ditch. The circle’s inner ditch effectively doubles the 
monumental impact of the walls. New evidence suggests that it was 
designed to hold water, like the ditch or pit features at other sites. 
It may evoke that watery Beneath World or, since it is continuous 
here, another Indigenous tradition—­the Spirit Barrier. The ancient 
clay and limestone lining apparently held water for centuries, be-
cause at least two witnesses reported water standing in it after 1800. 
But in the long run, maintenance would have been required, be-
cause the subsoil here is hundreds of feet of glacial sand and gravel 
into which any amount of water would otherwise just vanish—­as it 
does today. (At Mounds State Park in Anderson, Indiana, described 
on pages 116–117, a miniature version of the Great Circle still holds 
water in its interior ditch.)
3 Eagle Mound. An elegantly undulating mound lies at the center of 
the Great Circle. The settlers named it Eagle Mound for its winged 
shape. Excavations in 1928 revealed the posthole pattern of a long 
building with screen walls extending from its two eastern corners. 
Inside, a rectangular clay basin held fires, a sign of ritual activity, 
although unlike the grand lodges found at other sites, no human 
remains were laid here. Scraps of shiny mica littered one end of 
the floor. When they finished using the building, the people filled 
the fire basin with white sand, leaving little else behind except a 
pair of copper shapes. They dismantled the wooden structure, or 
burned it, and covered its floor with Earth. The mound’s shape was 
restored after the excavations.
4 Circular Wall. An excavation through the Great Circle wall in 
1992 suggested how the construction may have been done. First, 
the builders placed a set of point mounds around in a circle. Then 
they dug the ditch and formed its reddish-­brown soil into a ring. 
Finally, they brought yellow gravelly clay from deep pits nearby and 
placed it along the circular wall’s interior surface. Building tech-
niques probably had both spiritual and practical meaning: The yel-
low clay smoothed and supported the inner wall and helped direct 
water into the ditch, but the color, if it were somehow maintained 
in its exposed condition, would also have made for a more dramatic 
ritual space. The combination of reddish soil on one side of a wall 
and yellowish on the other was also used at several other Hopewell 
earthworks—­suggesting shared meanings perhaps as important as 
the watery circle itself.
The winged form of Eagle Mound covers the posthole pattern of a ceremonial building, 
oriented toward the earthwork’s northeastern gateway.
When it still held water, the Great Circle’s interior ditch would have created a continuous 
mirror image of the earthen wall, and the sky beyond.


--- PDF PAGE 59 ---

102
103
World Heritage Route
World Heritage Route: EAST
EARTH, SOIL
These people built all their durable monuments out of soil—­the Earth—­one 
basket load at a time. But this was clearly a lot more than just dirt for them. 
For one thing, they understood it very, very well—­the exact properties of 
different types: for good drainage, or for holding water, or for maintaining 
different slopes. They often layered it in different colors or textures, or mixed 
it with sand or gravel. Sometimes they burned it to make it red. But they also 
knew the soil for reasons beyond just its physical or aesthetic properties: It 
was the Earth itself, and full of meaning. It gives life; it consumes the dead. 
And in the earthworks, it marked their understanding of the heavens, of their 
community, and of their territory.
Low embankment walls, like this one 
restored in the park just north of the 
Great Circle, once formed the Newark 
Earthworks’ continuous perimeter.
The large Fairmount Mound and a small church 
stand together in a cemetery southeast of 
Newark, not far from the Dawes Arboretum.
Wright Earthworks. Few other remnants of the ancient Newark 
Earthworks complex survive. Not far from the Great Circle (158 
James St.), two short roughly perpendicular walls are preserved—­a 
fragment of one of the square’s sides and part of the connector wall 
once leading toward the ellipse. The walls seem small, so when we 
imagine the complete square—­about the size of nine city blocks—­
their function as an “enclosure” must have been very subtle. The 
destruction began here as early as the 1820s, when the Ohio and 
Erie Canal came through. Less than twenty years later, Squier and 
Davis reported, “The ancient lines can now be traced only at in-
tervals, among gardens and outhouses. . . . A few years hence, the 
residents upon this spot will be compelled to resort to this map, 
to ascertain the character of the works which occupied the very 
ground upon which they stand.”
Cherry Valley Ellipse. Nothing survives of ancient Newark’s burial 
ground. An elliptical enclosure northeast of the square, it was the 
cemetery of the earthwork’s builders, comparable in both function 
and grandeur to Mound City. Eleven conical mounds, plus a small 
ring and a rectangular platform, surrounded a large, irregular, con-
joined mound at the center. One set of burials here was covered in 
sheets of gleaming mica; another held the extraordinary “Shaman 
of Newark” figurine. Canal construction, then the railroad and its 
adjacent factories, destroyed the ellipse and its mounded tombs 
very early. Old records show that all this 
destruction unearthed large quantities 
of objects made of copper and other 
precious materials—­now all lost.
Construction Methods. Building the Newark complex eighteen centu-
ries ago required moving more than seven million cubic feet of Earth. 
It would have taken several generations, or an enormous number of 
workers, or both. Except where there was an unusually convenient 
source, like those soil cliffs along Raccoon Creek beneath the Octagon, 
mining and transporting Earth was a lot of work. They extracted it with 
pointed digging sticks, or hoes made with a deer shoulder blade tied 
onto a handle, and then transported it from its source in single basket 
loads. The apparent requirements for specific soil types—­each for its 
color, texture, or permeability—­could mean bringing it in from several 
locations, and over considerable distances. With the small popula-
tions, even during organized gatherings, we must assume that every-
body was somehow involved in these massive public works projects.
5 Processional Ways. Stone steps and a bridge (built during the site’s 
entertainment days) cross the northern arc of the Great Circle into 
open parkland. To the northeast, two long sections of embankment 
walls have been restored. Low walls like these once encircled the en-
tire Newark complex, as shown on the Salisbury map. Without crossing 
these lines, celebrants had only three points where they could enter, 
and all three suggest ceremonial approaches from water. Once inside, 
the people were channeled from one specialized enclosure to another, 
among the elements of what Brad Lepper has called “a gigantic ritual 
machine.” To imagine the crowds—­pilgrims and their leaders—­moving 
in processions from one space to another suggests the reenactment of 
a flow of power, or elaborate multi-­stage rituals reflecting fundamen-
tal, cosmological cycles.


--- PDF PAGE 60 ---

105
104
World Heritage Route: EAST
THE SHAMAN OF NEWARK
The only work of Hopewell artistry known to be from the Cherry Valley 
Ellipse is an extraordinary fist-­sized figure of a spiritual leader dressed in 
bear skin regalia and holding a human head in his lap. The bear’s head 
is on his head, and the bear’s claws are on his hands. He’s wearing a pair 
of the large Hopewell-­style ear spools, as is the decapitated head. The 
figure has no base, meaning there is no way to set it down; it was apparently 
designed to be held in the hands whenever it was out in the open. The 
position of the bear’s face on top of the head allows anyone holding the 
figure to enact its transformation—­from human to bear and back again—­
simply by tilting it slightly up or down. (Out of respect for Indigenous 
sacred patrimony, no image is provided here.)
Dawes Arboretum. Six miles south of downtown Newark (7770 Jack-
sontown Rd., Newark), the 2,000-­acre Dawes Arboretum presents 
a landscape wonderland. Hiking and driving loops lead among 
tree and plant specimens of all kinds—­including a native bald-­
cypress swamp, a Japanese garden, and a large restored wetland. 
One trail (requiring special permission) leads past a small mound. 
Daweswood, the 1867 home of the park’s founders, is now a mu-
seum. About three miles south and east of Dawes Arboretum, just 
off old US Route 40, stands the large Adena-­era Fairmount Mound 
(9161 Fairmount Rd., Thornville). At fifteen feet high and eighty feet 
in diameter, it impressively crowns a high ridge, along with the pic-
turesque Fairmount Church and a large cemetery. It has not been 
excavated.
TO THE MUSKINGUM ROUTE
Travel scenic roads to the important Hopewell earthworks preserved in the town of 
Marietta—­itself a significant historical settlement. Along the way, near Newark, visit 
Blackhand Gorge and the Flint Ridge Ancient Quarries; then Glenford Fort earthworks 
and Somerset. The rest of the route follows the Muskingum River (with its historic 
hand-­operated lock system), via McConnelsville and Stockport, to its confluence with 
the Ohio River at Marietta (see map, page 188).
4
Upper Miami Route
Head north out of Lebanon to reach ancient, scenic, and historic 
sites along the upper reaches of the Little Miami River, especially 
the Great Council State Park, the spectacular Clifton Gorge, the Pol-
lock Earthworks, and the unique towns of Waynesville and Yellow 
Springs. The greater Dayton area, besides its world-­famous aviation 
heritage, boasts the restored Fort Ancient–­era SunWatch Village. 
Nearby on a hill overlooking the Great Miami River at Miamisburg 
is Ohio’s largest Adena mound.


--- PDF PAGE 61 ---

106
107
Upper Miami Route
Upper Miami Route
Nearly anything that’s old is available 
among Waynesville’s many furniture, 
antique, and specialty shops.
Larger than life, a bronze statue of the Shawnee leader Tecumseh  
(by sculptor Alan Cottrill, 2024) welcomes visitors to Great Council State Park.
Waynesville. About nine miles northeast 
of Lebanon is the well-­known “antiques 
capital” of Waynesville. Well-­preserved 
historic buildings line Main Street, 
housing cafés and shops that have made 
this a major destination for antique and 
furniture buyers. More than fifty dealers include some with various 
specialties. Just outside of town is Caesar Creek State Park (8570 SR 
73, Waynesville), surrounding a 2,830-­acre lake with boating and a 
swimming beach. The rest of the park has forests, waterfalls, and 
cliff faces known for rare geological specimens and fossils. Between 
Waynesville and Xenia, leave the US Route 68 bypass to visit the vil-
lage of Spring Valley, where several picturesque buildings are pre-
served, some with unique local establishments. Nearby are canoe 
and kayak liveries along the Little Miami River (inquire locally).
Xenia. Much of the historic center of nearby Xenia (founded in 
1803) was destroyed by a catastrophic tornado in 1974—­with notable 
holdouts like the tall-­towered Greene County Courthouse, and the  
unusual Dodds Memorials building a block west (a lavishly orna-
mented transplant from the 1904 St. Louis World’s Fair, at 123 West 
Main St.). A few elegant period houses survive along East Second 
Street, and more along North King Street. Two miles northeast, in 
an outer subdivision, stands the Kinsey Road Mound—­a small, rare 
Adena mound still encircled by a ditch and ring. A mowed clear-
ing at the end of a residential cul-­de-­sac (next to 968 Mound Court, 
Xenia) leads to the low mound. The approach crosses over the best-­
preserved section of the surrounding ring and ditch; the rest is some-
what obscured by trees but most evident toward the left. Few such 
mound-­and-­ring combinations survive, the largest and finest being 
Marietta’s Conus Mound.
GREAT COUNCIL STATE PARK
This Ohio state park, in the tiny village of Oldtown, commemorates 
one of the several seats of the Shawnee Tribe during the time of 
settlement; a beautiful museum tells the stories of the Shawnee 
people—­here in Ohio and today in Oklahoma.
History and Setting. Around 1780, the Shawnee Tribe’s principal 
town (or chillicothe—­the home of their chief and council house) 
stood here, three miles north of Xenia near the banks of the Little 
Miami River. A state park at Oldtown (a translation of “Old Chilli- 
cothe”) commemorates the site (1580 US Route 68, Xenia). The 
Shawnee had been displaced twice from previous locations in the 
Ohio Country by encroaching settlement, and they were forced to 
move again after just three years here. (Local lore that this was the 
birthplace of their great leader, Tecumseh, is now in doubt.) The 
tribe’s council house once stood on the high ridge behind the vis-
itor center. Between the museum and the river, trails take visitors 
out among restored prairie landscapes, ecological displays linking 
past and present, and the extensive traces of the town plan revealed 
by remote sensing archaeology.
Shawnee Tribal Exhibits. Today there are three Shawnee Tribal Na-
tions based in Oklahoma. The Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma, 
the Absentee Shawnee Tribe, and the Shawnee Tribe all collaborated 
on the Great Council State Park’s museum and its exhibits, which not 
only recount their Ancestors’ lives here and throughout Ohio, but also 
offer an expansive treatment of the region’s American Indian history, 
the lives of their great leaders, their encounters with early explorers 
like Simon Kenton and Daniel Boone, early trade relations, and the 
ensuing conflicts over land and settlement. The tragedies of forced 
assimilation and Indian Removal from Ohio are also covered, and 
stereotypes about Native Americans are persuasively challenged. The 
vitality of today’s tribes is presented with pride and celebration.


--- PDF PAGE 62 ---

108
109
Upper Miami Route
Upper Miami Route
stone cliffs, rock shelters, a large Adena mound, and an impressive 
waterfall.
Orientation. Indian Mound Reserve, a Greene County park west of 
Cedarville, offers an extensive trail system. To reach the earthworks 
and mound, use the parking area adjacent to a restored log cabin 
(US Route 42 and Williamson Ln., Cedarville). Signs explain the var-
ious trails: One leads to the large, Adena-­era Williamson Mound on 
a hill beyond the creek, and another follows the gorge to an impres-
sive waterfall. The trail to the Hopewell enclosure heads east from 
the parking lot for about 1,300 feet, where it rises through one of 
the earthwork’s three prominent gateways. The earthen walls, the 
surrounding cliffs, and the creek are in dense forest, so the best 
time to visit is from October to April.
The Earthworks. The wall’s four 
segments close off the western 
end of a plateau which, for the 
rest of its perimeter, drops off 
over sheer cliffs above small rock 
shelters. For many years, beginning in 1981, archaeologist Bob  
Riordan worked with his Wright State University students to un-
cover how the Hopewell builders created this embankment wall. 
First, around 50 CE, they built up a low earthen wall across the ap-
proach to the plateau, extending it about 300 feet between the creek 
bluff on the north and the start of the limestone cliff on the south; 
they left one gateway in the center. It was carefully built: A thin ini-
tial layer of clay was laid down to prepare the surface, and then soil 
was brought in. Over about 100 more years, they made two separate 
additions to the wall, making it higher and leaving two more gate-
ways. The earthwork’s outer surfaces contained a lot of stone, and 
the gateway passages were paved and lined with limestone blocks.
THE SHAWNEE AND OHIO
Although her Ancestors were forcibly removed from Ohio long ago, Eastern 
Shawnee Chief Glenna Wallace describes why it matters that her people’s story 
be told here in their homeland: When we first came back—­and “we” meaning 
my tribe—­when we came with the ninety people in 2007, we really didn’t know 
how we would be accepted. We didn’t really know how we would be treated. 
We didn’t know what people would say about us. We really didn’t even want 
newspapers or the media to know, because it was like 
a religious pilgrimage to us. We left Ohio, but we are 
still alive. We are still a thriving culture. And it’s very 
important for us to preserve that culture, and to let 
people know that we didn’t die. We want our people 
to be remembered; we want our contributions to be 
honored. (Link to video is on page 205.)
Wilberforce. Very near Oldtown (east via Brush Row Rd.) is Wil-
berforce, the home of two historically Black schools: Central State 
and Wilberforce Universities. The latter was founded in 1856 as the 
first institution of higher learning owned and operated by African 
Americans. Its faculty and alumni have included many distinguished 
leaders and scholars. Wilberforce is also home to the National Afro-­
American Museum and Cultural Center (1350 Brush Row Rd.). The 
museum has one of the largest collections of African American 
materials in the nation—­manuscripts, artworks, civil rights mem-
orabilia, textiles, and other artifacts—­some of which have specific 
connections to Wilberforce and other Little Miami Valley locales 
important in the Underground Railroad. Southwest of town is  
Youngsholm (1120 US Route 42 East), the restored home of Charles 
Young, best known for his early-­1900s leadership of the African 
American army units known as “Buffalo Soldiers.” His home, now 
presented by the National Park Service, was also a focal point for the 
rich artistic, cultural, and political life surrounding the town and col-
lege at Wilberforce. (Nearby, Charleton Mill Road crosses Massie’s 
Creek on a recently restored covered bridge.)
POLLOCK EARTHWORKS
A large county park preserves one of the most thoroughly studied 
Hopewell earthworks, where forested trails lead to an earthen wall, 
The Pollock Earthworks enclose the 
western end of a plateau otherwise 
surrounded by sheer rock cliffs.
The principal gateway into the Pollock 
Earthworks greets hikers at the end of the 
access trail.


--- PDF PAGE 63 ---

110
111
Upper Miami Route
Upper Miami Route
One of America’s oldest and largest surviving water-­powered grist mills stands above the 
scenic Clifton Gorge.
The Big Fire. The most refmarkable construction phase at Pollock 
was the building of a huge timber stockade along the earthen wall 
and extending far out along the northern bluff. Sometime after build-
ing this tall fence, they burned it, pushed it down, and immediately 
buried the smoldering remains. That undoubtedly impressive spec-
tacle was part of a Hopewell pattern of burning things—­buildings, 
stones, soil, sacred objects, deceased kin—­all to be returned to ash 
and smoke, to Earth and Sky. Whether the earthen wall, the mud-­
plastered stockade, or the intentional fire had a defensive or a cere-
monial function is not known.
EN ROUTE TO DAYTON
North of Cedarville, the Little Miami River flows through three beautiful contiguous 
nature preserves between the tiny historic village of Clifton and the picturesque 
university town of Yellow Springs. This small district is surprisingly rich in history, 
culture, and dramatic scenery.
Clifton Gorge. Five miles north of the Pollock Earthworks, via  
Cedarville, is the tiny village of Clifton, whose adjacent gorge was 
once named by National Geographic magazine as one of the nation’s 
fifty most beautiful places. At the end of the last ice age, a peculiar 
funneling of glacial meltwater carved a narrow crevice here through 
which the Little Miami River now rushes, framed by 110-­foot, vertical 
limestone cliffs and towering 300-­year-­old trees. The spectacle and 
its rare microclimates seem especially astonishing in this otherwise 
only slightly rolling agricultural landscape. From a small parking 
area (169 Jackson St., Clifton), a path follows the canyon’s rim above 
the rushing torrent. From another trailhead, off State Route 343, hik-
ers can reach the bottom and walk among huge boulders fallen from 
the cliffs above. In the early 1800s, several industrial operations har-
nessed the confined, concentrated power of the river here. One of 
the old mills, its huge wooden building, millrace, and waterwheel 
intact, now houses a popular restaurant—­the Historic Clifton Mill (75 
Water St.).
Yellow Springs. Three and a half miles west of Clifton is Yellow 
Springs, a picturesque and delightfully eccentric college town and 
former spa—­home to the recently revived Antioch University, which 
counts among its alumni many notables including Coretta Scott 
King, Rod Serling, Clifford Geertz, and Stephen Jay Gould. The his-
toric town center is filled with interesting shops and unique cafés. 
Near Yellow Springs, John Bryan State Park offers excellent rec-
reational opportunities including eleven miles of hiking trails, 
mountain biking, waterfalls, rock climbing, camping, fishing, and 
a covered bridge. The state park and its trails are contiguous with 
Clifton Gorge on the east, and the private nonprofit Glen Helen Na-
ture Preserve on the west. Glen Helen trailhead parking (503 Corry 
St., Yellow Springs) gives access to a network of trails in and around 
the wooded valley, with small waterfalls, a mound, and other inter-
esting features. The extensive Little Miami Scenic Trail, perfect for 
biking, walking, and running, passes by the park entrance.
Enon Mound. Seven miles northwest of Yellow Springs (via Tecum-
seh Rd.), at the edge of the village of Enon, one of Ohio’s largest 
mounds anchors a mid-­century subdivision aptly named “Indian 


--- PDF PAGE 64 ---

112
113
Upper Miami Route
Upper Miami Route
Calvary Cemetery spreads across a 
series of steep glacial ridges once 
encircled by a hilltop earthwork.
Mound Estates” (400 Mound Circle, Enon). The steep twenty-­eight-­
foot mass of the mound is only partially tree covered, so its fine 
profile is visible from many angles, as adjacent streets radiate from 
its 110-­foot diameter base. Almost certainly of Adena origin, it has 
not been excavated.
DAYTON
Although best known today for its aviation history—­the Wright 
brothers, and Wright-­Patterson Air Force Base—­this valley of the 
Great Miami and Mad Rivers also has important ancient places, 
easily accessible from the city’s downtown and riverfront parks.
History and Setting. This broad river valley site was settled in 1796 
by a small party who had moved up from Cincinnati. The area was 
called the “Mad River Country” after the large tributary joining the 
Great Miami here from the northeast. One Jonathan Dayton (who at 
age twenty-­six had been the youngest signer of the US Constitution) 
first acquired a large tract of land here. The settlement grew signifi-
cantly during the canal era, and over the next century it became 
a center of innovation and industry—­especially with the National 
Cash Register Company, founded in 1884, and the Wright brothers’ 
pioneering aviation work soon after. Several historic Dayton neigh-
borhoods date from the mid-­to-­late 1800s through the early 1900s.
Oregon Historic District. The oldest part of the city is a wedge-­shaped 
area southeast of downtown called Oregon: About twelve square 
blocks of narrow, shady streets, first laid out in 1815, are lined with 
closely set, picturesque, gable-­fronted brick houses. Oregon grew 
quickly after the Miami and Erie Canal opened in 1829, spurring the 
development of industries. Immigrants, especially from Germany, 
arrived in the 1830s. East Sixth, Green, and Tecumseh Streets have 
some of the oldest houses; Jackson and Van Buren have some of the 
grandest. Brown Street is named for a brickmaker, Thomas Brown, 
who encouraged (and supplied materials for) his neighbors to re-
place their log cabins with the more substantial structures here 
today.
Calvary Cemetery Earthworks. A large cemetery off South Patter-
son Boulevard, about three miles south of downtown (1625 Calvary 
Dr.), occupies the site of a hilltop earthwork that once overlooked 
the Great Miami River 160 feet 
below. Many of the cemetery’s 
beautiful curving drives and 
monuments are laid out across 
a series of strange, steeply rolling glacial ridges that would have 
formed the interior of the ancient enclosure. Cemetery construc-
tion destroyed most of the earthwork’s walls, but fragments remain 
along the northern edge atop the steep forested bluff. Openings into 
the woods offer seasonal glimpses of these surviving remnants; the 
most evident crosses a low point between two ridges: Look for the 
Froendhoff monument adjacent to the second (western) loop of  
St. Joseph Drive and proceed to the fence line. The earthwork is 
7 feet high and about 30 feet away, partially concealed by a dense 
honeysuckle thicket. It is on Carillon Historical Park property and 
not accessible.
Carillon Historical Park. Below Calvary Cemetery to the north, Car-
illon Historical Park (1000 Carillon Blvd.) spreads out behind its 
tall modern bell tower (offering daily concerts). A large welcome 
center introduces visitors to an outdoor museum of Dayton history, 
where a fine collection of early settlement structures and exhib-
its has been assembled, including the log-­built Newcom’s Tavern 
(Dayton’s oldest, from 1796), as well as a variety of early houses and 
industrial buildings. Many of the remaining structures develop a 
transportation theme: a steam 
engine from the National Cash 
Register Company, a canal lock, 
two bridges, a railway station, 
and commuter rail cars. Most 
significant is the amazing orig-
inal Wright Flyer III airplane 
flown by the brothers in 1905.
Carillon Historical Park preserves 
several of Dayton’s oldest build-
ings, including Newcom’s Tavern, 
built in 1796.


--- PDF PAGE 65 ---

114
115
Upper Miami Route
Upper Miami Route
meticulously reconstructed houses typical of the relatively settled 
Fort Ancient culture that flourished in the Ohio Valley 800 years 
ago. Thorough archaeological work began in the 1970s, uncovering 
the full village layout. A scale model in the museum shows how the 
fence, houses, storage pits, and burials formed concentric rings 
around an open plaza. A period garden is maintained on the grounds 
today, and a festival ground hosts Native American events and cer-
emonies. SunWatch is managed by the Dayton Society of Natural 
History, whose Boonshoft Museum of Discovery (2600 Deweese 
Pkwy., Dayton) holds finds from 
the site’s investigations, plus nat-
ural history and archaeology col-
lections from many cultures.
Houses. The quality of the houses 
suggests a remarkable level of 
comfort, and their construction may also resemble the Hopewell-­
era house-­building techniques of a thousand years earlier. Each 
reconstructed building is based on a posthole pattern found during 
the site’s investigation. Twigs were woven between vertical posts, 
then plastered with mud—­a method called “wattle and daub.” The 
steep thatched roofs had deep overhangs to keep rain away from the 
walls. Built-­in benches inside were for sitting and sleeping; a central 
hearth was vented through the roof. Some had special uses: The Big 
House was a kind of community center, another was a men’s lodge, 
and the rest were dwellings of matrilineal families.
Shadows and Time. The modern name SunWatch is derived from 
the way a pole in the center of the plaza would cast its shadow into 
the doorways of certain houses at sunrise. The shadow’s cycle of 
movement, from one door to another throughout the year, marked 
out a calendar for agricultural and ceremonial purposes. The 
current central pole is forty feet high, estimated from the size of 
the original posthole, so its early morning shadow was long. All  
the villagers could watch, day by day, as its shadow approached the 
most important days of the year, notably the winter solstice and  
the times for spring planting and autumn harvesting.
Dayton Aviation Heritage. Many Dayton area sites recount and  
celebrate the city’s role in the invention and growth of aviation; 
information is available from the nonprofit Aviation Trail website, 
or at the Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park visitor 
center (16 South Williams St.). The National Park Service manages 
several important sites commemorating the legacy of local bicycle 
makers and flight pioneers Orville and Wilbur Wright. These include 
the Wright Cycle Company complex and the adjacent museum (at 
the South Williams St. location), the nearby home of Paul Laurence 
Dunbar (the Wrights’ friend and famous African American poet), 
and the Huffman Prairie Flying Field and its interpretive center on 
the Wright-­Patterson Air Force Base. The rest of aviation history is 
vividly presented at the huge National Museum of the United States 
Air Force (1100 Spaatz St.), where over 350 air and space vehicles, 
plus other displays, fill in the story all the way up to current precision 
stealth technology.
Wright Mound Group. A memo-
rial monument to the Wright 
brothers stands in a hilltop park 
in front of the Huffman Prairie 
Flying Field Interpretive Center 
(2380 Memorial Rd.). Sweeping views overlook the Mad River, the 
Huffman Prairie where the Wrights did their testing, and beyond 
to the huge runways of the Wright-­Patterson Air Force Base. Along 
the northern and western edges of this small park and picnic area 
is a rare cluster of six small Adena-­era burial mounds. The largest 
is just over four feet high and fifty feet in diameter.
SUNWATCH VILLAGE
This partially restored period settlement is the best place in Ohio 
to see the town-­dwelling, house-­building, corn-­planting lifeways 
of the Fort Ancient culture; its modern name is derived from the 
sundial effect of poles positioned in the central plaza.
Orientation. Four miles southwest of downtown Dayton, on the 
right bank of the Great Miami River, this archaeological park (2301 
West River Rd., Dayton) includes an excellent museum and several 
Six mounds of various sizes line the edge 
of a peaceful park adjacent to the Wright 
Brothers Memorial and Huffman Prairie 
Flying Field Interpretive Center.
A model in the SunWatch museum 
portrays the concentric planning of 
the village around its central, 
shadow-casting poles.


--- PDF PAGE 66 ---

116
117
Upper Miami Route
Upper Miami Route
The reconstructed houses at SunWatch Village prove surprisingly comfortable during cold 
weather sleepovers, but only by burning massive amounts of firewood.
GROWING CORN AT SUNWATCH
Archaeologist Andy Sawyer explains how the residents of SunWatch Village 
grew their main staple food, along with other crops: Corn played a big 
role in the community here; in fact, it was probably the main reason they 
decided to settle down into rather permanent villages—­to take care of the 
corn crop. Historically, the way American Indians in this region grew their 
crops was they would make little mounds in their 
gardens, about a foot or so high, two or three feet 
around, and at the top center of the mound they 
would plant the corn. Once the corn sprouted, they 
would plant the beans. So they would kind of grow 
up together, and what would happen is, as the corn 
grew, that corn stalk provided a trellis for the beans. 
(Link to video is on page 205.)
The morning shadow of the 
village’s central pole enters 
the doorways of certain 
houses when it is time for 
planting or harvesting.
The perfect conical form of the Miamisburg Mound stands atop a high bluff, offering long 
views up and down the Great Miami Valley.
Anderson Earthworks. Although a bit far afield (100 miles northwest 
of Dayton), Indiana’s Mounds State Park is worth a trip (4306 Mounds 
Rd., Anderson, Indiana). Several well-­preserved earthen enclosures 
date from about 250 BCE to 50 CE, suggesting an Adena affiliation, but 
their forms are exquisitely Hopewell—­a rounded-­corner rectangle 
with an interior ditch and eastern gateway, and a 9-­foot-­high circular 
earthwork whose 300-­foot diameter and water-­retaining interior ditch 
make it a quarter-­scale version (and given its early date, a possible 
precursor) of Newark’s Great Circle. A unique “Fiddleback” (panduri-
form) enclosure lies nearby.
EN ROUTE DOWN THE GREAT MIAMI VALLEY
Southeast of Dayton, follow the old Dayton Cincinnati Pike along the river, or take 
State Route 4 toward Germantown, to the Miamisburg Mound and Carlisle Fort. From 
nearby Franklin, State Route 73 and Route 4 connect (via Middletown) to the Hamilton 
area and its earthworks—­treated in the next chapter.
Miamisburg Mound. Downstream from Dayton along the Great 
Miami River, on a high hill above Miamisburg’s historic center (900 
Mound Rd.) stands one of the two largest Adena-­era burial mounds 
in North America. (The other is in Moundsville, West Virginia.) It 
is certainly the most spectacularly situated, rising 68 feet above 


--- PDF PAGE 67 ---

119
118
Upper Miami Route
what is already a 100-­foot bluff. Its 54,000 cubic yards of soil cover 
one and a half acres under a perfect conical profile. The location 
is the highest point for miles around. Climbing the 116 stone steps 
to the top affords splendid views up and down the valley—­from at 
least the hills west of Hamilton to the tops of downtown Dayton’s 
skyscrapers. Limited archaeological work revealed the mound was 
built in stages, and contained at least two burial vaults—­one 8 feet 
from the top with a bark-­covered grave, and another 36 feet down 
with a log chamber but no human remains.
Carlisle Fort. Across the Great Miami from Miamisburg, between 
Germantown and the village of Carlisle, a trail in the Twin Creek 
MetroPark (8502 Chamberlain Rd., Franklin) leads to the remains 
of Carlisle Fort, a roughly triangular Hopewell hilltop enclosure. 
Called the Hopewell Trail, it climbs through an open meadow, then 
turns right along a well-­preserved three-­foot-­high earthen wall that 
seems to glide through the woods atop steep razorback ridges and 
around sharp corners. An especially impressive prow points to the 
southeast, down a long ridge. The steep ridges here have made this 
earthwork more susceptible to erosion than most others.
TO THE LOWER MIAMI ROUTE
Continue downstream along the Great Miami through Middletown to meet the Lower 
Miami Route at the Rentschler Forest Preserve just outside Hamilton, and on to Miami 
Fort, Greater Cincinnati, and the lower end of the Little Miami Valley. Or return via 
Franklin to Lebanon or Fort Ancient and the World Heritage Route.
5
Lower Miami Route
From either Miamisburg or Lebanon, follow the Great Miami River 
to its three surviving hilltop enclosures. Greater Cincinnati has 
several mounds and top-­tier cultural attractions. Its eastern sub-
urbs along the Little Miami once held the greatest concentration 
of Hopewell geometric earthworks outside of Chillicothe’s Paint-­
Scioto region, and although most are now lost, their stories are sig-
nificant. Overall, the rich cultural history of southwest Ohio offers 
much to enjoy. 


--- PDF PAGE 68 ---

120
121
Lower Miami Route
Lower Miami Route
Fortified Hill. About three miles 
southwest 
from 
downtown 
Hamilton, probably the most 
unusual of all Hopewell hilltop 
earthworks encircles the very high wooded hilltop just southwest 
of the Pyramid Hill Sculpture Park and Museum. (Pyramid Hill, 
which purchased the site for preservation, is an impressive 300-­
acre park where monumental artworks are exhibited among rolling 
hills, forests, and tranquil lakes.) 
Of the earthwork’s three very 
elaborate gateways, the labyrin-
thine northern one does not sur-
vive, but the mirror-­imaged south 
and east ones do, complete with 
their seasonal water features. 
Long sections of the southern and 
eastern walls are also visible from 
the one-­mile loop trail. Consult 
the Pyramid Hill office or website 
for information on their regular 
monthly schedule of public earth-
work tours (1763 Hamilton Cleves 
Rd., Hamilton, 513-­868-­8336).
Fernald Preserve. An engaging 
visitor center now anchors and 
explains this reclaimed natural 
area, once an infamous Cold War 
uranium refinery (7400 Willey Rd., Hamilton). Exhibits explore the 
site’s complex and contentious history—­from Indigenous artifacts, 
to farm families, to the proud workers who helped “win the Cold 
War.” Radioactive leaks led to media scandals, and after the US De-
partment of Energy’s decades-­long, several-­billion-­dollar cleanup, 
Fernald is now a restored prairie landscape with surprisingly spec-
tacular ecological diversity and wildlife splendor. In this nature 
lover’s paradise, eerie rectangular ponds echo the contaminated 
Squier and Davis illustrated the distinctive 
“parentheses and circle” gateway of the 
Fairfield Township Earthworks.
A digital reconstruction of Fortified Hill 
illustrates its labyrinthine northern gate 
(left) and the Great Miami River beyond.
Fairfield Township Earthworks. 
The Great Miami region’s earth-
work builders seem to have rel-
ished 
unusually 
labyrinthine 
gateway designs, evident here 
and at nearby Fortified Hill. 
A trailhead in the Rentschler Forest MetroPark, about four miles 
northeast of the city of Hamilton’s downtown waterfront (5574 
Rentschler Estates Dr., Hamilton), skirts a large meadow before 
entering the forest, where the enclosure’s southern perimeter wall 
appears. Inside, the site’s most distinctive feature remains intact: A 
100-­foot-­diameter earthen formation consists of two arcs holding a 
low earthen ring between them like two hands. The trail continues 
through the woods and arrives at a small sign, positioned at the “fin-
gertips” of this unique gateway design. The larger walls in the dis-
tance are at the “wrists.” In the foreground lies the 75-­foot-­diameter 
earthen circle, though its 2-­foot height can be hard to see in the for-
est undergrowth. Another park entrance (via Reigart Road) leads to 
a pleasant picnic area with amenities beside the river, and a pictur-
esque remnant of the Miami and Erie Canal.
Hamilton. The seat of Butler County has three historic districts. 
Rossville, to the west across the river bridge, was once a separate 
settlement and retains a small downtown with a good collection 
of older buildings along Main and D Streets. East of downtown, 
the Dayton Lane area retains several large homes of the city’s in-
dustrialists in various 1800s styles. An unusual pair of octagonal 
buildings anchor the nine-­block German Village area just north of 
downtown. The 1863 Lane-­Hooven House (319 North Third St.) is a 
small Gothic Revival gem with fine woodwork and a spiral stair; it 
now houses the Hamilton Community Foundation and is open for 
tours by appointment. The house was built for Clark Lane (a Ham-
ilton industrialist and philanthropist), who commissioned another 
octagon directly across the street a few years later: The Hamilton 
Lane Library was the first free public library west of the Allegheny 
Mountains.
From the Great Miami Valley’s concentration of 
terrace and hilltop earthworks, as mapped here 
in the 1840s by Squier and Davis, only Fortified Hill 
(upper right) survives today.


--- PDF PAGE 69 ---

122
123
Lower Miami Route
Lower Miami Route
From the Fernald Preserve visitor center, 
the sunrise position moves along the 
distant mound of contaminated 
radioactive debris throughout the year.
WHITE WATER SHAKER VILLAGE
Several buildings survive from one of thirteen settlements across New 
England and the Midwest founded by the industrious Shakers during 
the first quarter of the 1800s (11813 Oxford Rd., Harrison). Five were in 
Ohio, but this is the only one of those to survive. Twenty buildings are 
preserved as part of Miami Whitewater Forest (a huge county park), includ-
ing some buildings along New Haven Road—­notably the only Shaker meet-
ing house built of brick, and the large North Family Dwelling next door. These 
Shakers, like their brethren in the east and in Kentucky, thrived for decades 
through careful farming methods and successful sales of brooms, seeds, 
and other products.
The eastern walls of Miami Fort, and its southeastern gateway shown here, are among the 
Hopewell world’s most impressive visible remains.
footprints of the manufacturing 
plants, and a long, hermetically 
sealed mound full of buried 
radioactive waste dominates the 
eastern horizon.
The Fernald Mound. When the 
Department of Energy cleaned 
up this contaminated site in the 
1990s and early 2000s, they shipped the most seriously radioactive 
waste out west—­on miles of train cars. But the less-­dangerous de-
bris was entombed on the site, sealed in the long mound that will 
forever dominate the eastern horizon here. Called by its engineers 
the “On-­Site Disposal Facility” (or OSDF), it will be monitored far, 
far into the future for any impacts on the aquifer. The visitor cen-
ter’s diagonal axis points to the Sun’s northernmost rising position 
over the mound’s elevated horizon; the sunrise then moves back 
and forth along the top of the mound throughout the year. So, like 
at Mound City, the eastern horizon is made to calibrate the per-
ceived orders of the cosmos, and in perpetuity. The Sun will swing 
back and forth along the mound, and the DOE’s Office of Legacy 
Management will monitor the mound indefinitely.
Miami Fort Earthworks. One of Ohio’s greatest hilltop enclosures 
crowns a narrow ridge at the extreme western end of a large county 
park, high above the broad flood plain where the Great Miami River 
joins the Ohio. Spectacular annual bird migrations flock to the  
wetlands below.
Orientation. From the entrance to Shawnee Lookout, a large county 
park (2008 Lawrenceburg Rd., North Bend), a long winding drive 
passes a small mound and several historic structures, before 
ending at a parking area from which the Miami Fort Trail climbs 
steeply to a narrow ridge. Here, Ancient Ohioans built and main-
tained for centuries a hilltop enclosure, still well preserved. The trail  
enters the earthwork’s northeastern gateway and continues along the 
northern wall with glimpses of the huge (Teays-­age) Great Miami 


--- PDF PAGE 70 ---

124
125
Lower Miami Route
Lower Miami Route
Valley on the right. Outside the 
earthwork’s western corner, an 
extension of the ridgetop trail 
leads out to a small mound and 
the spectacular panorama of the 
river confluence below. As with 
most of the now-­forested earth-
works, the best time to see the 
architecture here is from Octo-
ber to April.
Loop Trail. From the western 
corner of the Miami Fort enclo-
sure, the trail goes south and 
passes perhaps the site’s most 
interesting feature—­ a series of 
stepped ponds still able to hold 
substantial amounts of water. 
Beyond, 
the 
southern 
wall 
drops into a steep ravine before 
returning to the hilltop to frame periodic (or seasonal) views out 
to the Ohio River. The southeast corner of the enclosure forms a 
dramatic prow form, and the trail then follows the interior ditch 
of the well-­preserved eastern wall to the point where it entered the 
earthwork at its northeastern corner.
William Henry Harrison Tomb. Access to Miami Fort is inevitably 
via the village of Cleves, home to the ninth president of the United 
States (and the father of the twenty-­third), where he is buried be-
neath an imposing monument (41 Cliff Rd., North Bend). Harrison 
began an army career in the 1790s, fought with General Anthony 
Wayne in the decisive Battle of Fallen Timbers, and was present at 
the signing of the Treaty of Greenville, which banished Indigenous 
people to land far north and west of the Ohio River. As governor of
Shawnee Lookout west of Cincinnati presents 
a dramatic view over the broad valley where 
the Great Miami River joins the Ohio.
the Northwest Territory, he encouraged settlement whilemaking 
constant inroads on Native lands. In 1811, he led an army to victory 
at Prophetstown (in Indiana Territory), where people from many 
tribes were hoping to unite under the Shawnee leader Tecumseh 
to drive the American settlers back. After the War of 1812, Harri-
son was elected first to Congress, and then to the US presidency. 
Only a month after taking office in 1841, he died of pneumonia.
RIVER ROAD INTO CINCINNATI
A historical marker (422 South Miami Ave., Cleves) commemorates one of only twelve 
canal tunnels built in the US, cut through a small hill here (Harrison was a canal 
advocate, and this was part of his extensive farm) to connect Cincinnati to Indiana’s 
Whitewater Canal. A remnant of the tunnel’s northern entrance lies mostly buried 
deep in the woods nearby. On the way into Cincinnati from here (via US Route 50, part 
of the Ohio River Scenic Byway), the large elliptical Short Woods Park Mound stands 
at the far edge of a public golf course in the pleasant Sayler Park neighborhood (7000 
Fernbank Ave., Cincinnati).
CINCINNATI
Called “The Queen of the West,” this hilly, picturesque Ohio River 
city was the largest west of the Appalachians—­a hub of canal and 
river traffic until the railroads began to redirect western commerce 
through Chicago instead.
History and Setting. In 1788, Cincinnati was founded on a high ter-
race above the Ohio River where two tributaries flow into it from 
large, ancient Teays-­age valleys. After Portsmouth and Marietta, 
this was the next such landscape available for major settlement 
on the northern banks of the Ohio. And like those other settle-
ments, such prime real estate was already covered with ancient 
earthworks: As Harrison put it, when he first saw this level plain 
in 1791, “it was literally covered in low lines of embankments. . . . 
The number and variety of figures in which these lines were drawn 
was almost endless.” The city’s name derives from the “Order of the 
Cincinnati”—­American Revolutionary War officers whose ideal was 
to return, like the Roman military leader Lucius Quinctius Cincin-
natus, from military achievement to their peacetime vocations, es-
pecially farming. The city grew into an economic powerhouse and 
major cultural hub, the largest west of the Appalachians until after 
the American Civil War, when the new railroads attracted most new 
commercial growth to Chicago.
A series of stepped ponds remain well  
preserved along Miami Fort’s western wall.


--- PDF PAGE 71 ---

126
127
Lower Miami Route
Lower Miami Route
THE ORDER OF THE CINCINNATI
After their Revolution, cutting themselves free of the British Empire, the 
officers of George Washington’s army formed what they called the “Order of 
the Cincinnati”; and many of them tried for a kind of geographic new start in 
the Ohio Valley. They came to Marietta, Ohio, and found there the evidence 
of an older order—­a grid, rectilinear earthworks that bespoke a settled and 
disciplined way of arranging buildings, as they intended to arrange a society. 
It was for them a new start, under severe discipline. And to that George 
Washington said he hoped to come to join them, because what he found 
abiding on the East Coast he described as the “rubbish” that he thought 
they had tried to eliminate. A new possibility in the West has always been the 
American aspiration.
—­Roger G. Kennedy, American historian and former director of
the National Park Service
Little remained of Cincinnati’s earthworks 
(highlighted here in black) when Daniel 
Drake recorded them on this map in 1815.
remains of the earthworks here 
were mapped by local physician 
Daniel Drake. But the city was 
growing and prospering rapidly, 
and the “variety of figures” noted 
by Harrison (and the forests that 
had long protected them) were 
gone before any further records 
could be made—­other than the 
exploration of two mounds as 
they were being taken down.
Urban Districts. German immigrants flocked to the city throughout 
the 1800s, undoubtedly appreciating the setting’s resemblance to 
the Rhine or the Moselle Valleys. They created a dense urban neigh-
borhood just north of downtown filled with breweries, drinking 
halls, and vast brick and stone churches adorned with Germanic 
inscriptions. Called Over-­the-­Rhine for its position across the canal 
(now Central Parkway) from the city center, that area is today one 
of the nation’s finest surviving nineteenth-­century urban fabrics 
and most successful urban revitalization zones. Hilltop neighbor-
hoods were once served by inclined railways, and before that cov-
ered with vineyards, including tiny Mount Adams, immediately to 
the east, with its romantically inspired Eden Park.
University of Cincinnati Earthworks. Clifton is another nineteenth-­
century neighborhood, on the hilltop two miles to the north, and 
now home to the University of Cincinnati. Beginning in the 1980s, 
campus leaders began commissioning internationally known 
architects for all new buildings. Some of them are of great inter-
est individually, but all are now also harmonized by the brilliant, 
ancient-­earthworks-­inspired master plan designed the following 
decade by the internationally known landscape architect George 
Hargreaves. Large mounds connect to sinuous and angular berms 
and winding pathways, weaving the various avant-­garde buildings 
into an attractive unity.
Cincinnati’s Earthworks. The city occupies a beautiful setting, 
surrounded by wooded hills and valleys that carve its inner-­ring 
neighborhoods into highly distinct and often picturesque en-
claves. The symbolic heart of the vibrant city center is Fountain 
Square and the adjacent Art Deco masterpiece Netherland Plaza 
Hotel, which occupy the position of a huge elliptical earthwork that 
once dominated this high terrace above the river. In 1815, the scant 
The hills of Devou Park in Covington, Kentucky, offer the prime view of Cincinnati’s  
Ohio River setting.


--- PDF PAGE 72 ---

128
129
Lower Miami Route
Lower Miami Route
(left) Cincinnati’s Taft Museum of Art is an 1820s 
Federal-­style gem whose early owner, Nicholas 
Longworth, maintained vineyards on the nearby 
steep slopes of Mount Adams.
(right) A small lane off 
Indian Mound Avenue leads to the 
enigmatic, elliptical Norwood Mound.
The Mariemont Earthwork 
follows the terrace edge along 
Miami Bluff Drive in a quiet 
residential neighborhood.
Mariemont. A half-­timbered Tudor inn and a Gothic style church 
help this 1930s suburb to exude English-­village ambience, but 
street names like “Cachepit Way” and “Flintpoint Way” hint at a 
much longer history. An ancient earthen wall parallels Miami 
Bluff Drive, having been recorded by Charles Metz (another Cincin-
nati physician-­archaeologist) long before the development of the 
town. At the southwestern end of the same street, a small park 
and historical marker commemorate the Madisonville Site and the  
importance of this high terrace location in antiquity and in the early 
development of American archaeological knowledge.
Newtown Mounds. Mariemont overlooks the Little Miami River, which 
flows through a broad valley for several miles toward its confluence 
with the Ohio. Just across the river is the village of Newtown, where 
two mounds stand inside Flag Spring Cemetery (3549 Round Bottom 
Rd.). The more prominent mound stands at the center; a much lower 
one is beside the fence near the entry gate. Nearby in the village, 
excavations in the 1980s at what was then the local firehouse and is 
now the Newtown Municipal Center (3537 Church St.) uncovered two 
spectacular shell gorgets from around 400 CE, incised with detailed 
animal figures. An interactive video and artifact exhibit is open to the 
public in the remodeled firehouse, highlighting the finds from that 
site and from a Fort Ancient culture village just outside town, and 
showcasing the very important (though now lost) Turner Earthworks 
that were just up the road.
Turner Earthworks. The greatest of the ancient ceremonial sites 
lining this wide valley was Turner, where two geometric figures 
lay across the high terraces near the intersection of Round Bottom 
and Mount Carmel Roads. From here came some of the Hopewell  
culture’s most beautiful artistry including clay figurines, a mica 
serpent with a pearl eye, and an effigy of a strange horned creature 
Four Museums. Housed beneath and behind the huge semidome of 
the city’s spectacular 1930s railway station, the Cincinnati Museum 
Center presents excellent history, science, and archaeology exhib-
its. The National Underground Railroad Freedom Center down-
town commemorates the significance of the Ohio River boundary 
between slavery and freedom, while other exhibits and programs 
raise issues of contemporary injustice. The Taft Museum of Art 
maintains a small but astonishing collection of masterworks in an 
exquisite 1820s Federal-­style mansion at the foot of Mount Adams. 
The Cincinnati Art Museum’s comprehensive collection compares 
well with any major metropolitan museum; a gallery devoted to 
local furniture makers showcases what happened to all that lumber 
arriving from Newark’s Cherry Valley (see page 88).
Norwood Mound. Mounds occupy prominent sites in several of Cin-
cinnati’s outlying neighborhoods. The largest and most impressive 
is the Norwood Mound (adjacent to 2409 Indian Mound Ave., Nor-
wood), standing in a small hilltop park reached by a narrow alley 
between two houses. The tiny lane circles the unusually steep el-
liptical mound at very close range. The presence of the city’s water 
tank nearby emphasizes the prominence of this high hilltop loca-
tion overlooking an ancient preglacial course of the Ohio River.
THE LITTLE MIAMI VALLEY
The Little Miami Valley suburbs east of Cincinnati retain only a few 
traces of what was once the second-­greatest concentration of Hopewell 
geometric earthworks, though some have remarkable stories to tell.


--- PDF PAGE 73 ---

130
131
Lower Miami Route
Lower Miami Route
THE NEWTOWN GORGETS
Two large marine shells from the Gulf of Mexico or southern Atlantic, incised 
with images, were found at the Newtown firehouse site. Archaeologist 
Bob Genheimer reflects on their depictions of a possum and a mountain 
lion: When you think about possums, none of us have warm and fuzzy 
feelings about possums, and it wouldn’t have been our first animal choice. 
But the mountain lion, I think most Westerners can understand that sort of 
symbolism: a very fierce, individualistic animal that used to be here. This 
mountain lion is in plan view, so you’re looking in the belly of the lion, and the 
head of the lion is on top, big bushy tail on the bottom, and then the two front 
paws and the two rear paws, which are enormous—­
the feral cats have these large paws. It’s really 
an eerie thing to look at that gorget. When it was 
first exposed, it was a really spiritual experience to 
see that animal staring you in the face for the first 
time in probably fifteen or sixteen hundred years. 
(Link to video is on page 205.)
Archaeologists from the Peabody Museum at 
Harvard University studied the spectacular  
Turner Earthworks outside Newtown in the  
1880s and 1890s.
Squier and Davis’s 1840s drawing of the 
Milford Works illustrates the site’s most 
unique feature on the hill to the left.
(most are now in the collections of the Peabody Museum of Archae-
ology and Ethnology at Harvard). Inside a large oval enclosure, an 
unusual cluster of mounds was laced together by rings of stone. 
Fires were lit beneath one of them in deep clay-­lined chambers 
that would have attained 1200-­degree temperatures. Plowing of 
the earthworks began as early as 1825, and careful studies were 
made before 1900. But eventually it was all destroyed by a graveling 
operation.
Milford. Atop the small hill just above the town of Milford’s thriv-
ing and historic Main Street lay one of the strangest features of 
any Hopewell earthwork. In Squier and Davis’s words, “Diverging 
lines extend to the south-­west, terminating in a maze of walls un-
like any others which have yet fallen under notice.” The Milford 
Works shared with nearby Turner the unusual combination of 
two enclosures set on different levels and connected by a walled  
passage. They disappeared long ago, although faint traces of its 
open-­cornered square appear on old aerial photographs of a nearby 
cemetery.
TO THE BRUSH CREEK ROUTE
Heading east out of Milford on US Route 50 leads to Hillsboro and the Brush Creek 
Route (see map, page 133), with the option of a short detour via State Route 131 
to the Fort Salem Earthworks—­a unique site midway between the major Hopewell 
concentrations of the Little Miami Valley and the Paint-­Scioto heartland.
TO THE WORLD HERITAGE OR UPPER MIAMI ROUTES
Following the river upstream from Milford involves navigating some backroads and 
small streets. The town of Loveland has a pleasant historic center and is a major hub 
on the Little Miami Scenic Trail. Upscale Montgomery offers more direct access to US 
Route 22 (its Main Street and the early 1800s route to Circleville and beyond), and to 
Interstate 71.
Foster. Frederic Ward Putnam of Harvard University, sometimes 
called the “father” of American scientific archaeology, focused 
most of his late-­1800s Ohio efforts in the southwestern part of the 
state. Besides Serpent Mound and Turner, he investigated another 
Little Miami site—­a hilltop enclosure called Foster (preserved on 
private land but not visitable). Putnam called it “a singular ancient 
work” because of the astonishing action of fire within its walls, 
which he found loaded with heavily burned soil and stone. They 
were capped with vitrified clay—­turned to bright orange glass by 


--- PDF PAGE 74 ---

133
132
Lower Miami Route
intense heat. Clay-­firing ovens at the site were outfitted with flues 
to control the airflow and produce very hot temperatures. The 
wooded hilltop site is directly across the river from the Monkey Bar 
and Grille—­a popular stop for cyclists on the Little Miami Scenic 
Trail.
Stubbs Earthworks. In the late 1990s, archaeologists had the op-
portunity to explore—­albeit hurriedly—­the construction site 
for a new high school west of the village of Morrow (3001 E. US 
Route 22, Morrow). The land held the scant remains of the 
Stubbs Earthworks, once one of southwest Ohio’s grandest geo-
metric enclosures. A low irregular mound still lies today in 
a loop of the school’s driveway, over the remains of a multi 
chambered building. Archaeologist Frank Cowan and a team 
from the Cincinnati Museum Center discovered, about where the 
school’s grandstand is now, a 271-­foot-­diameter circle of postholes. 
This was the first evidence of a giant woodhenge found from the 
Hopewell era, and it coincided with an earthen circle recorded on 
an early-­1800s plan of the Stubbs site. Other examples found since 
(at the Hopeton Earthworks and the Hopewell Mound Group) now 
suggest that perhaps many—­or even most—­earthworks were also 
outlined or preceded by huge open-­air timber constructions.
TO THE WORLD HERITAGE OR UPPER MIAMI ROUTES
From Morrow, both Lebanon and Fort Ancient are nearby; from there join either the 
World Heritage Route (see maps, pages 24 and 72) or the Upper Miami Route (see 
map, page 105).
6
Brush Creek Route
Branch off the World Heritage Route between the villages of New 
Vienna and Bainbridge, through Hillsboro and as far south as West 
Union. Along Ohio Brush Creek (its full name) and its upper trib-
utary, Baker Fork, lie two of Ohio’s most beautiful earthworks—­the 
world-­famous Serpent Mound and the pristine hilltop enclosure of 
Fort Hill. Nearby in Highland, Adams, and Ross Counties are many 
exceptional natural preserves—­with rock-­cliff gorges, sweeping 
prairies, idyllic waterways, and rare species.


--- PDF PAGE 75 ---

134
135
Brush Creek Route
Brush Creek Route
Hillsboro, the Highland County seat, 
features a variety of historic houses along 
East Main Street; this one houses the local 
historical society’s museum.
The serpent’s uniform coils lie across the gentle curve of the hilltop; the head (in the far 
distance) and the tail (off to the left) hang above sheer cliffs.
Hillsboro. Glance at a map of the 
Virginia Military District (page 
16) and it seems that all roads 
lead to Hillsboro. The town was 
founded in 1807 and its growing 
economy supported agriculture, 
grain and livestock processing, 
and equipment manufacturing. The 1833 Greek Revival Highland 
County Courthouse overlooks the intersection of High and Main 
Streets with their rows of historic storefronts. On South Main, an  
impressive old brick opera house awaits restoration. East Main Street 
presents an excellent variety of historic houses, including the 1840s 
Federal-­style Highland House (at #151)—­now home to the county’s 
history museum. At the eastern edge of town (7592 SR 124), one of 
America’s oddest roadside oddities can be seen—­the “world’s largest 
horseshoe crab,” famed for its role in the movie The Twilight Saga: 
Eclipse.
Fort Salem Earthworks. Located about twelve miles southwest  
of Hillsboro via State Route 138 toward Cincinnati (4206 Certier 
Road, Lynchburg), the Fort Salem Earthworks consist of two con-
joined mounds on a gentle rise at the center of a 450-­foot roughly  
circular wall and ditch. The remote location bridges the two predom-
inant Adena-­Hopewell cultural regions of the Little Miami and Scioto
Valleys. A beautiful grove of beech trees overlooks a sharp bend  
in the river below where 
turtles breed, suggesting 
the conjoined mound may 
represent a turtle.
A circular wall and ditch, and a 
beautiful grove of trees, surround 
this conjoined mound at the 
remote Fort Salem Earthworks.
THE APPALACHIAN PLATEAU
Heading east from Hillsboro, distant hills signal the ecological seam running from 
the Ohio River northeast to the Newark area and beyond. Most of Ancient Ohio’s 
greatest earthwork monuments lie among the overlapping ecologies where the flat 
plains meet these unglaciated Appalachian foothills. For the last mile before Serpent 
Mound, the road crosses the valley of Ohio Brush Creek—­here part of a mysterious 
300-­million-­year-­old cryptoexplosion crater.
SERPENT MOUND
One of the world’s most famous ancient works of art slithers beauti-
fully across the saddle of a hill, its tightly spiraling tail and solstice-­
aligned head both lying atop sheer cliffs.
Orientation. The well-­marked site entrance is in the wide valley 
of Ohio Brush Creek (3850 SR 73, Peebles). Hours vary seasonally, 
so consult the Ohio History Connection website. The access road 
climbs past a small mound before ending in a tiered parking area 
adjacent to restrooms and, ahead, the small museum. Approaching 
the effigy, its spiraling tail is on the left, while the three coils in the 
center are overlooked by a 1908 iron tower. Paved walks surround 
the effigy, and a somewhat rugged trail drops into the valley and 
approaches the stream. Serpent Mound seems surprisingly small 
for visitors accustomed to the gigantic and far older Hopewell 


--- PDF PAGE 76 ---

136
137
Brush Creek Route
Brush Creek Route
version may have existed in Adena-­Hopewell times. Long before 
that, the huge geological anomaly in which the creature rests, with its  
unusual hills and strange rocks, could well have suggested the place 
had special power. In 1883, Harvard archaeologist Frederic Ward 
Putnam first visited the serpent, and began a successful campaign 
to buy and restore it. Harvard gave the property to the state of Ohio 
in 1900, and today it remains a state memorial managed by the Ohio 
History Connection.
1 Museum. This modest wooden building dates from the 1930s  
and houses a well-­stocked gift shop and small exhibit space. Visitors 
can watch an informative video about the site that is updated peri-
odically. A medium-­sized mound stands near the museum, dated by  
archaeologists to the Adena era. Another Adena mound, and a 
smaller one from the Fort Ancient culture, stand farther away near 
the approach road.
2 Spiraling Tail. As the path approaches the effigy, the tail comes 
into view on the left, its tight spiral leaning gently outward  
toward the edge of a cliff that drops sharply to the waters of Brush 
Creek far below. The spiraling tail resembles that of Ohio’s other  
important effigy, Granville’s so-­called Alligator Mound. The Great 
Serpent was a powerful creature of the watery Beneath World in 
widespread and long-­standing Indigenous cosmological traditions. 
The subtle shapes here are Putnam’s restorations, based on the  
records of earlier nineteenth-­century delineators. There were  
several versions, especially of the head, both before and after Putnam 
did his work. To this day they leave room for many interpretations.
The Cryptoexplosion. Views from the tail (and the head) extend to 
the distant southwestern rim of a four-­mile-­wide crater formed 
300 million years ago by what geologists call the “Serpent Mound  
Disturbance.” Either an asteroid collision or an underground  
explosion blew apart more than seven cubic miles of rock—­uplifting 
a central area more than 1,000 feet and dropping an outer rim more 
than 400 feet. After eons of erosion, Serpent Mound and the hills  
behind it lie on the shattered fragments of the central uplift, while 
the distant ridgetops stand high today because they are the much 
harder Ordovician bedrock that was offset by the event. The strange 
geology of this spot was first noticed in modern times by Dr. John 
Locke of Cincinnati, who named it “Sunken Mountain” in 1838.
monuments, yet its elegant beauty and undeniable evocation of 
spiritual power have a vivid allure of their own. The view from the 
creature’s head faces the summer solstice sunset over the rim of 
the distant crater. Serpent Mound is especially alluring early or late 
in the day when shadows are deep.
History. Although some uncertainty persists, both carbon dating 
and iconographic evidence persuasively connect the effigy to the 
widespread Mississippian cultural world (in Ohio called the Fort 
Ancient tradition, from about 900 CE onwards). The shapes of 
the serpent’s head resemble Mississippian symbols as far away as  
Missouri. The nearby Adena-­era mounds indicate this location 
was important for centuries before, and it’s possible that an earlier 


--- PDF PAGE 77 ---

138
139
Brush Creek Route
Brush Creek Route
Rising from the saddle of the hill, the 
serpent’s triangular neck (or open mouth) 
adjoins the oval head (or egg, or Sun).
John P. MacLean’s 1885 plan of the serpent’s head depicts 
what he interpreted as a frog about to be eaten, but there 
have been various other explanations.
the oval shape, yet the respective axes of those 
two shapes are not in alignment with that 
imaginary line nor with each other.
The Serpent’s Mysteries. Judging from the 
diversity of its historical interpretations, and 
of its modern visitors, Serpent Mound means 
many things to many people, even as it re-
mains little understood by archaeologists today (compared to the 
older Hopewell sites). Questions persist about its date, its builders, 
and its meanings; Indigenous views also vary widely. It may be the 
Great Serpent of the watery Beneath World, or the Horned Serpent 
of American Indian legend, perhaps in the act of swallowing the 
Sun, as during an eclipse. Its probable construction date could link 
it to the “blazing serpent in the Sky” that we call Halley’s Comet, 
whose brightest known appearance was in 1066. Perhaps most in-
triguing, a recent discovery notes the resemblance of at least one 
of the head’s early plans (John P. MacLean’s—­the most complete in 
this respect) with other Mississippian images of an Indigenous cre-
ation story in which the First Mother receives her creative power by 
mating with the Great Serpent (the oval becomes her womb).
5 River Trail. Below the Serpent winds Brush 
Creek, through the wide bottom of the an-
cient crater. On either side of the snake’s 
body, steep trails lead down through the 
forest to the banks of the stream where, 
especially in the winter, the undulating 
shape of the bluff is visible. Most promi-
nent is a sharply jutting headlike forma-
tion directly beneath the serpent’s head. 
The effigy’s builders may have understood 
from generations of their Ancestors that 
3 Three Coils. The most beau-
tiful part of the effigy is its trio 
of matching coils. They seem so 
refined, and yet defy efforts to 
discover any regular geometries. 
While they seem uniform from 
above, as they unwind across the saddle of the hill, they gently un-
dulate, giving the creature’s body a slithering, lifelike energy. Some 
have linked the individual coils’ roughly symmetrical shapes to the 
solstice and equinox sunrises, but their axial alignments are both 
hard to pinpoint and quite imprecise—­off by as much as eleven 
degrees. Remote sensing investigations have recently revealed the 
trace of a fourth coil at the creature’s neck; it was unknown to any 
of the site’s previous delineators.
Serpentine Form. Nobody is indifferent to snakes. Whether it was 
veneration or trepidation that inspired its builders, this creature’s 
beauty and power are obvious. Like all great art, it appeals to us by 
blending the recognizable with the abstract. Its stylized precision 
speaks of “all serpents,” and also more generally of “the serpen-
tine” as an aesthetic quality. The genius of its designers remains 
apparent, and this blend of beauty, familiarity, abstraction, power, 
precision, and mystery makes Ohio’s Serpent Mound one of the 
great iconic images from all human antiquity.
4 The Head. The far end of Serpent Mound is so beautifully ab-
stracted that it has baffled its various interpreters for decades. Is it an 
egg, a frog, or the Sun? Is it the snake’s open mouth, its giant never-­
blinking eye, or its poison glands? Part of the confusion stems from 
the many versions depicted on nineteenth-­century plans, depending 
on what was visible to each delineator. Squier and Davis described, 
for example, how the builders had modified the ground to create 
symmetrical ten-­foot-­wide surfaces along both sides of the oval fig-
ure. The cliff promontory here points northwest, toward where the 
midsummer Sun sets over the distant rim of the cryptoexplosion 
crater. But again, a soft imprecision reigns, since the true solstice 
alignment is across the center points of the triangular “neck” and 
From the banks of Brush Creek 
below Serpent Mound, a stone headlike 
formation is visible directly beneath 
the effigy’s head.


--- PDF PAGE 78 ---

140
141
Brush Creek Route
Brush Creek Route
this formation was already charged with the spiritual powers of 
serpents—­that a giant snake was already embodied in the cliff itself 
or was slithering out of it.
A Sacred Site. Many visitors find Serpent Mound to be a power-
ful, sacred site, inspiring many interpretations for many people, 
groups, and traditions. Recent management efforts are seeking to 
reestablish an authentic link with contemporary American Indian 
tribal ideas, and to discourage the theories and practices that have 
historically detracted from or disrespected its known Indigenous 
origins (for example, that it was created by a race from another 
continent, or another millennium, or even another planet). Yet the 
annual summer solstice sunset celebrations still draw visitors with 
many sometimes-­eccentric ideas about what lies behind the appar-
ent spiritual power of this site.
ZANE’S TRACE NORTH OR SOUTH
Just east of Serpent Mound, State Route 41 follows the path of historic Zane’s Trace. 
Go south from Locust Grove toward West Union for the many natural preserves of 
southern Adams County. North, through Sinking Spring and past Fort Hill, the 
Appalachian Plateau’s dense topography of forested mountains is to the right. Near 
(just above) Serpent Mound, small roads cross the cryptoexplosion’s long-­eroded 
central debris pile, although the strange geology is not readily apparent.
Quiverheart Gorge Preserve. At this protected Arc of Appalachia na-
ture preserve (2199 SR 781, Peebles), two improved but strenuous 
trails offer over three miles of hiking through a narrow, dolomite-­
rock canyon. The exceptional scenery includes waterfalls, dra-
matic rock shelters, and rich spring wildflower displays. An ancient 
prairie remnant adds to the preserve’s high biodiversity. The first 
steam-­powered iron blast furnace west of the Appalachian Moun-
tains was in full operation here by 1815; remains of the large piles 
of charcoal that once fueled the furnace are still visible along the 
trails. Several other Arc of Appalachia preserves offer hiking trails 
within a few miles of here, including Plum Run Prairie, Kamama 
Prairie, and Chalet Nivale. For excellent descriptions and direc-
tions consult the Arc’s website.
Zane’s Trace. State Route 41 in this vicinity was the first official 
road designated in the state of Ohio, having been a section of 
the first pioneer road connecting Wheeling, West Virginia, with 
Kentucky. The route arrived in Locust Grove from Chillicothe, 
then continued southwest toward Maysville, Kentucky—­today 
a beautifully preserved historic river town. Just over a mile past 
Dunkinsville, on the west side of the road, stands one of the  
oldest structures in Ohio—­the John Treber House, built in 1798 as 
the Treber Inn, an early wayside for 
Zane’s Trace travelers (17759 SR 41, 
West Union). The house is privately 
owned and not open to the pub-
lic, but a historical marker stands 
beside a small parking space out 
front.
One of Ohio’s oldest surviving structures, 
the 1798 John Treber House served as 
a coach stop on Zane’s Trace, the early 
pioneer route into Kentucky.
THE SERPENT OF EDEN
Serpent Mound’s self-­evident symbolic form and spiritual power have 
suggested many meanings to many people, usually based on the ideas they 
brought with them. Archaeologist Brad Lepper recounts one especially 
telling example: The Reverend Landen West, who right around 1900, saw the 
serpent, this magnificent serpent, with what he thought was something in the 
serpent’s jaws, said, “This isn’t just any serpent. This 
is the serpent of the Garden of Eden, with the apple 
in its mouth. And this was built by God to mark the 
location of Eden.” Now, Adams County is a beautiful, 
beautiful natural area, natural environment, but I 
think the notion that it’s the Garden of Eden is telling 
us a lot more of what was on the Reverend West’s 
mind than what was in the mind of the people who 
built it originally. (Link to video is on page 205.)


--- PDF PAGE 79 ---

142
143
Brush Creek Route
Brush Creek Route
Orientation. The 1,500-­acre Fort Hill Earthworks and Nature Pre-
serve (13614 Fort Hill Rd., Hillsboro) is largely owned by the Ohio 
History Connection, but has been expanded and is currently man-
aged by the Arc of Appalachia, whose website offers up-­to-­date 
information, descriptions, and trail guides. Three well-­improved 
but strenuous trails total eleven miles, mapped and explained on 
a prominent kiosk next to the parking and picnic area. The Fort 
Trail ascends to the 33-­acre Hopewell enclosure, follows its western 
wall, and returns to the parking area via a steep descent. At the far 
southern end of the park, other connecting trails lead to an open 
meadow with a well-­preserved circular earthwork. The three-­mile 
Gorge Trail follows rugged terrain along Baker Fork.
Edge of Appalachia Preserve. The abundant and diverse natural won-
ders of Adams County surround West Union, chief among them the 
21,000-­acre multisite collection of the Edge of Appalachia Preserve 
System (headquarters at 4274 Waggoner Riffle Road, West Union). 
These lands are co-­owned and managed by the Cincinnati Museum 
Center and The Nature Conservancy; and open year-­round, dawn 
to dusk. The most popular among a variety of hiking experiences is 
a large rock promontory with long views called Buzzardroost Rock; 
its trailhead is near the village of Lynx (16299 SR 125, West Union). 
Other sites offer dense forests, dolomite cliffs, expansive vistas, 
and large dry limestone prairie landscapes. Trail maps and infor-
mation are available on the Cincinnati Museum Center’s website.
Ohio Brush Creek. From Serpent Mound to the Ohio River, this idyl-
lic stream is a paddler’s paradise. The forty-­two-­mile scenic and se-
cluded waterway has nine put-­in points allowing for either short or 
multiday trips, with some sections suitable for floating. It is clean 
and full of fish, with practically no visual intrusions on the natu-
ral landscape for the entire distance. Inquire locally for details and 
water level conditions.
Sinking Spring. Heading north from Serpent Mound or Locust 
Grove along Zane’s Trace (State Route 41) passes through the vil-
lage of Sinking Spring, whose architectural highlight is the 1831  
Octagon Schoolhouse (2 SR 124, Sinking Spring), which is unique in 
Ohio. It is set back from the road on well-­maintained grounds, and 
although the doors are kept locked, the large windows offer ample 
views of the furnished interior.
FORT HILL
An ancient hilltop earthwork stands today in one of the Midwest’s larg-
est old-­growth forests, an unparalleled combination of adventurous 
hiking, converging ecosystems, and ancient earthen architecture.
One of Ohio’s several  
octagonal buildings is a  
well-­cared-for, though 
disused, schoolhouse in the 
center of Sinking Spring.


--- PDF PAGE 80 ---

144
145
Brush Creek Route
Brush Creek Route
The stone and timber picnic area structures at Fort Hill, like those at several other Ohio 
sites, were built by the 1930s Depression-­era Civilian Conservation Corps.
In winter the walls and gateways of Fort 
Hill are clearly visible from below, outlining 
the edge of the plateau.
Hilltop trails at Fort Hill pass along the 
earthwork walls among magnificent 
old-­growth trees; sandstone paving blocks, 
mined from the hilltop, are everywhere.
Ecology and History. The park is a remarkable convergence of ecosys-
tems. Rare plant and animal life thrives in micro-­conditions which 
can vary dramatically with minor changes in elevation and expo-
sure. The lower bedrock at Fort Hill is dolomite, a soluble limestone 
which, when exposed, creates what is called a karst landscape. Fort 
Hill abounds with its characteristic features—­rock arches, palisades, 
gorges, seeps, and sinkholes, plus spectacular spring wildflower 
displays (the peak is early to mid-­April). The earthworks were built 
around 400 CE and survive today as a rare example of a Hopewell-­
era site that has not been disrupted by modern human activities. 
Like Fort Ancient and the other hilltop enclosures, the walls here 
were almost certainly not a fort but rather the massive delineation 
of a grand ceremonial enclosure whose prominent setting ensured it 
would be visible to visitors arriving on foot from all directions. Fort 
Hill has been an archaeological and natural preserve since 1974.
1 Picnic Area. All Fort Hill hiking trails begin at the picnic area 
with its shady parking lot, small stream, and stone and timber struc-
tures erected here in the 1930s by the Civilian Conservation Corps. 
These and similar structures at other Ohio archaeological sites were 
part of the public outreach and facility enhancement initiatives by 
Henry Shetrone, the former newspaper reporter who was then the 
curator of archaeology at the Ohio History Connection. An infor-
mation kiosk welcomes all visitors in front of the picnic area and 
illustrates the preserve’s hiking trails, 
all of which begin at this spot. The 2.2-­
mile Fort Trail heads south, ascending 
the eastern flank of the hill beneath 
the ancient earthwork’s eastern and 
southern walls and gateways (visible 
from below in winter).
2 Western Wall. The Fort Trail attains 360 feet of vertical elevation, 
skirting just outside the enclosure’s southern wall before enter-
ing through the westernmost of the earthwork’s four prominent 
prow-­shaped gateways. The well-­preserved 6-­to-­15-­foot-­high wall 
and its accompanying inner ditch parallel the trail between here 
and the dramatic northern gate. The enclosure’s level interior is on 
the right. Many fine views are offered of the ancient earthworks, 
including several of its twenty-­nine other openings, and the large 
sandstone slabs with which the walls were covered. The giant trees 
of the old-­growth forest (some up to 20 feet in circumference) frame 
views across the landscape. A large pond—­at times brimming with 
frogs—­is visible near the northeastern wall.
Wall Construction. Tangled among the roots of Fort Hill’s giant old-­
growth trees are masses of now-­broken sandstone slabs, once part 
of an elaborate construction process that helped to ensure the wall’s 
durability on this high vulnerable slope. An inner core of stone 
blocks was laid down first along the path of the wall, providing a 
kind of ballast, followed by two parallel lines of Earth and stone. 
Those were then capped and unified 
by a final layer, up to 15 feet high, and 
surfaced with carefully shaped and 
fitted sandstone slabs taken from the 
top of the plateau.


--- PDF PAGE 81 ---

146
147
Brush Creek Route
Brush Creek Route
3 Northern Gate. As the Fort Trail approaches the enclosure’s 
northern end, the level plateau constricts into a narrow promon- 
tory—­a sheer rock-­walled outcrop resembling a ship’s prow. The 
ditch and two sections of wall encircle this stone platform, about 20 
feet below, and between them form the site’s widest gateway. Squier 
and Davis described this as Fort Hill’s “most remarkable” feature—­
for its rock walls, wide vistas, and evidence of fires having burned 
on the stone surface. From another gateway to the right (east), the 
Fort Trail begins its steep descent toward the parking area.
4 Small Circle. Other trail segments, including a piece of Ohio’s 
Buckeye Trail, lead out to a meadow at the southern end of the 
preserve where ancient ceremonial facilities and workshops were 
located. Emerging from the woods, and on the far right across the 
meadow, lies a treasure of Ohio’s ancient earthen architecture—­a 
small earthen ring. Though well preserved, its low outline is most 
visible in winter or when mowed. This may be the best kept of the 
several hundred that were recorded throughout southern Ohio 
during the 1800s. The timber structure preceding the circular 
earthwork, along with another 
nearby building, was part of a 
bustling Hopewell-­era craft and 
ceremonial area.
Arbor and Big House. The circle was partially excavated by Ohio 
History Connection archaeologist Raymond Baby (BAH-­bee) in 
1953. His exploratory trenches uncovered evidence of a double ring 
of posts (he called it an “arbor”) enclosing a 174-­foot-­diameter open 
space. A few hundred feet southeast of the ring is where Baby also 
found evidence (not visible today) of a 120-­foot-­long rectangular 
building. It suggests other known Hopewell-­era ceremonial halls 
like those at the Seip Earthworks. The 2,000-­year-­old prepared floor 
was littered with broken pottery, stone tools, and flint chips; pits 
were filled with debris from flintknapping. The building’s gridded 
timber framework was covered with sheets of bark or skins.
5 Gorge Trail. If time and daylight permit, return to the parking 
area via the challenging, four-­hour Gorge Trail. It follows the deep 
limestone crevice created by Baker Fork, a tributary of Brush 
Creek. The path climbs and descends several promontories, offer-
ing views of the river and karst country rock formations from both 
above and below. The plant life changes to those favoring these 
sheer rock cliffs: Ferns and tree roots cling to cliff faces high above 
stone arches and waterfalls. The trail passes through the shell of 
a preserved log cabin before returning to the parking lot from the 
northwest.
ROCKY FORK GORGE
In the nearby village of Cynthiana, take Barrett Mill Road to its intersection with 
Cave Road. Ahead on Barrett Mill is the trailhead of the Miller Nature Sanctuary State 
Nature Preserve. North on Cave Road is the Barrett’s Rim trailhead. Both lead into 
the cliff-­lined landscapes and habitats of the Rocky Fork Gorge. Barrett’s Rim is one 
of many properties of the Arc of Appalachia preserve system headquartered at the 
Appalachian Forest Museum farther up Cave Road.
HIGHLANDS NATURE SANCTUARY
At 3,000 acres, the Highlands Nature Sanctuary is the largest pre-
serve in the Arc of Appalachia’s system, with a wide variety of hik-
ing trail experiences centered on the beautiful Rocky Fork Gorge 
and the Appalachian Forest Museum.
The Arc of Appalachia. Between Fort Hill and Bainbridge lie many of 
the land holdings comprising this extensive system of natural pre-
serves and earthwork sites. The Arc is a fast-­growing private non-
profit with properties throughout south central Ohio and beyond, 
including a variety of overnight accommodations (which can be 
booked on its website). The organization’s headquarters at the Ap-
palachian Forest Museum (7660 Cave Rd., Bainbridge) is open daily 
from mid-­March through mid-­November (see its website for dates 
and times). The adjacent Rocky Fork Gorge is known for its stun-
ning rock formations, ancient white cedars, spectacular wildflower 
displays, grottos, springs, and stone arches. (The area was formerly 
a for-­profit tourist attraction called “Seven Caves.”) Maps and thor-
ough descriptions of the Highlands Nature Sanctuary’s many trails 
are available on the Arc’s website.
At the southern end of the Fort Hill property, 
an intact small circular 
earthwork appears in an open 
meadow, covering the remains of a 
double-­columned timber “arbor.”


--- PDF PAGE 82 ---

148
149
Brush Creek Route
Brush Creek Route
Trails from the Appalachian Forest Museum descend into the narrow canyon of the Rocky 
Fork Gorge, among cliffs, grottoes, springs, and stone arches.
THE ANCIENT FOREST
Arc director Nancy Stranahan suggests how the ancient earthwork builders 
and their monuments add meaning to the Paint Creek region’s natural 
wonders: Here where we live, in the Paint Creek Valley, we really feel like 
we live in the Valley of the Kings. Everywhere we go, we’re walking in their 
footsteps. We know their presence. We feel the honor and the obligation to take 
care of the land and maintain the landscape. These people just didn’t know. 
It wasn’t a postcard, it wasn’t a nature preserve, it wasn’t wilderness. It was 
their home. It was their community. They were 
part of that tapestry. Our organization is partly 
here because of the inspiration of the people that 
came before us. We want to not only maintain 
the memory of those people, and the history of 
those people, and the speculations of what they 
might be able to teach us if they were here today, 
but we also want to maintain their landscape. 
(Link to video is on page 205.)
Appalachian Forest Museum. The museum at the Arc’s headquarters 
provides staff information, a gift shop, and guides to the preserve 
system’s many land holdings and hiking destinations throughout 
the Highlands Nature Sanctuary and the wider region. Exhibits tell 
the story of the eastern broadleaf forest of the United States—­the 
largest of its kind in the world. Although that forest is now torn 
into tiny shreds by settlement, agriculture, and development, vis-
itors are encouraged to grasp the idea that it is still a huge single 
forest, to identify with it, and to help preserve it. A series of large 
murals offer an immersive vision of the forest at various stages of 
its development.
TO THE WORLD HERITAGE ROUTE
Continue one mile north of the Appalachian Forest Museum to where Cave Road joins 
US Route 50, and turn right for Bainbridge. The road enters the western end of the 
beautiful Paint Creek Valley, once home to a spectacular concentration of ancient 
earthworks. On the way, about 1,000 feet east of the intersection of State Route 41 
and US Route 50 (called Hirn’s corner), a large, tree-­covered mound stands near 
the highway.
TO THE LOWER SCIOTO OR LOWER MIAMI ROUTES
From West Union, State Route 125 leads east to Portsmouth and the Lower Scioto 
Route via a huge state forest and Shawnee State Park. Or take State Route 41 (Zane’s 
Trace) south from West Union to its historic destination of Maysville, Kentucky (with a 
fine downtown, and the nearby historic village of Washington), and then downstream 
along the Ohio to Ripley, Ohio (a major Underground Railroad site), and to Kentucky’s 
quaint Augusta (crossing the Ohio on its picturesque ferry), and on to Cincinnati and 
the Lower Miami Route.


--- PDF PAGE 83 ---

150
151
The 1840 Henry Mace House, near Mound City 
along State Route 104, exemplifies that century’s 
traditional I-­house type found throughout the 
eastern Midwest.
the century’s ornamental styles. Chim-
neys were at the ends (as here) or in the 
center. Examples with narrow gabled 
central porches probably signal a builder 
from Virginia. I-­houses can be spotted often in towns and along the 
region’s older routes; their various settings and treatments often 
present a striking elegance and charm.
Ohio and Erie Canal. About twelve miles north of Mound City, just 
off State Route 104 in the village of Westfall, Canal Road parallels 
the old canal route, including a rare, beautiful section where the 
waterway has been restored and about three miles of the towpath 
have been converted into a grassy walking trail. Canal Park (23352 
Canal Rd., Circleville), at the restored section’s northern end, has a 
shelter, interpretive signage, and the remains of the canal system’s 
stone-­built infrastructure—­traces of a dam across the river and the 
impressive hulks of a feeder channel used to maintain the canal’s 
water level. Between here and the center of Circleville, the canal 
once crossed high above the river on a massive timber aqueduct; 
the bases of its pylons still lie in the river.
7
Upper Scioto Route
North of Chillicothe, the hills defining 
the Scioto (Teays) Valley gradually di-
minish as the landscape transitions into 
the flat till plains en route to Columbus. 
Along the west bank of the river near 
the historic town of Circleville (named 
for its destroyed ancient earthwork) is 
a well-­preserved section of the Ohio 
and Erie Canal. Greater Columbus has 
many vibrant urban districts, the state 
capitol building, and the Ohio History 
Connection’s large museum and re-
stored Ohio Village. Parks among the 
city’s suburbs hold several interesting 
mounds and earthworks.
Henry Mace House. One and a half 
miles north of Mound City along 
State Route 104, on the right, stands 
a well-­proportioned example of 
the traditional nineteenth-­century 
dwelling type known as an I-­house. 
(The name derives from some of the 
Midwestern states where they were 
common throughout most of the 
1800s.) The pattern—­symmetrical 
with three or five window bays, 
two stories high, one room deep—­
was adaptable to both rural and 
urban settings; to wood, brick, or 
stone construction; and to most of 
A restored stretch of the Ohio and Erie Canal parallels the Scioto River along Canal Road 
southwest of Circleville.


--- PDF PAGE 84 ---

152
153
Upper Scioto Route
Upper Scioto Route
The Squaring. Within twenty years of the town’s founding, com-
plaints arose about its circular layout: The yard around the court-
house attracted swine, and the circular street plan was inefficient, 
especially with the growing commerce coming into town via the  
new canal. By 1837, the complainers prevailed, and the state-­
chartered “Circleville Squaring Company” began the job of destroy- 
ing the unique town plan, and with it what remained of the earth-
works, although it took 
fifteen years because of 
continued protests. 
The best-­known image of 
Circleville’s former cir-
cularity was made by a 
local candymaker named 
Gottlieb Wittich, whose 
heirs still run the oldest 
family-­owned candy store 
in the country (117 West 
High Street).
Local postmaster Caleb Atwater illustrated the double ring 
and adjoining square at Circleville; its long central axis 
became the town’s Main Street.
Ohio’s Canal System. The Ohio and Erie Canal was one of two ambi-
tious systems created in the 1830s to carry goods between the Great 
Lakes and the Ohio River. The cost nearly bankrupted the state, but 
as the backers had hoped, the channels could carry products from 
Ohio’s farms, mills, and mines to eastern markets (via Lake Erie and 
New York’s newly completed Erie Canal) more easily than wagons, 
and at one-­fifth the cost. Because both the canals and the ancient 
earthworks were built near Ohio’s rivers, they can often be found 
near each other. The canals gradually lost out to the railroads, and 
closed for good in 1913, yet aptly named towns like Lockington  
and Lockbourne still hold the great stone hulks of their locks,  
gates, and channels.
CIRCLEVILLE
Though the ancient earthwork in which it was originally laid out and 
for which it was named did not survive for long, downtown Circleville 
retains its central axis as Main Street, now lined with many grand 
nineteenth-­century buildings.
The Earthworks. Circleville was laid out in 1810, carefully planned 
within a twenty-­two-­acre, double-­walled, ancient earthen ring. 
With its attached square, this was one of the Hopewell culture’s 
greatest earthen masterpieces. Today, downtown’s Main Street 
(US Route 22) follows what had been the earthwork’s central axis.  
Admiring the precise ancient geometry, the founders laid out their 
streets in a radial pattern within the circle, building their small oc-
tagonal courthouse where a central burial mound stood. They began 
with preservation ideals, like their predecessors in Marietta (pages 
195–198), envisioning a novel blend of ancient and modern.
Caleb Atwater. Circleville’s early postmaster was Caleb Atwater,  
a brilliant and eccentric polymath whose 1820 Description of the  
Antiquities Discovered in the State of Ohio and Other Western States was 
the first systematic illustrated account of the earthworks. He advocated 
for the preservation of Circleville’s double circle and square, but it 
was not to be. Despite their loss, downtown Circleville today is well 
endowed with grand old buildings and flourishing commerce. A mural 
depicts the original octagonal courthouse, and a historical marker 
commemorates Atwater and his many remarkable achievements.
Among those most horrified by the 
“squaring” of Circleville was Caleb 
Atwater, author of the first scholarly 
survey of Ohio Valley antiquity.
Gottlieb Wittich’s historic 
drawing still adorns the metal 
candy boxes sold at Wittich’s 
Candy Shop and other historic 
memorabilia around town.


--- PDF PAGE 85 ---

154
155
Upper Scioto Route
Upper Scioto Route
THE PICKAWAY PLAINS
An excursion south of Circleville along US Route 23 leads into a 
gently rolling prairie landscape—­a region of great fertility, and 
the setting for some of Ohio’s most important American Indian 
settlements.
Mount Oval. Five miles south of the center of town, on a low hill 
just off Emerson Road, stands a classical mansion built in 1832. The 
Renick family had come from Virginia to breed cattle on these fer-
tile hills. From its hilltop site, between two good-­sized streams, the 
sweeping views over the landscape are reminiscent of those from 
Jefferson’s Monticello, and the unusual plan is almost certainly 
derived from a Jefferson sketch entitled “A temple for a garden.”  
A square central room with a pyramidal roof and rounded dormer 
adjoins three corner rooms with open-­air porches between them 
as would have been more common back home in Virginia. The 
grounds are open to visitors, and the Pickaway County Historical 
Society website offers information on events and other opportuni-
ties to tour the house.
Cornstalk Town. East of Mount Oval along Emerson Road, just past 
a grove of trees, a historical marker commemorates the important 
Shawnee towns here on the Pickaway Plains, specifically those led 
by the eloquent Chief Cornstalk and his brilliant sister, Nonhelema, 
in the third quarter of the 1700s. Nonhelema favored peace with 
the settlers, as far as possible during those fraught decades, but  
Cornstalk (Hokolesqua) led the Shawnee forces in Dunmore’s War—­
the struggle against Virginia militias over encroaching settlements 
to the south in Kentucky. He was forced to retreat to here, but 
then agreed to give up Shawnee claims in Kentucky in exchange 
for these Pickaway towns to be spared. The threats from Virginia’s  
expansion into Kentucky had already forced the relocation of Lower 
Shawneetown (the large Indigenous village at the mouth of the  
Scioto; see page 170) to here in 1758.
Logan Elm. The site of that 1775 peace council is less than two more 
miles south, off State Route 361 (4501 SR 361, Circleville). Logan Elm 
State Memorial honors Cornstalk and Nonhelema, and features the 
poignant story of Chief Logan, another American Indian leader 
who befriended settlers and hoped for peace. Inscribed on a stone 
monument are the words of “Logan’s Lament”—­his eloquent cry of 
Historic Center. The corner of Main and Court Streets is the heart 
of Circleville’s historic district. Shops line West Main Street, while 
south on Court Street are two of the town’s grandest buildings: the 
tall and lavishly ornamented Pickaway Masonic Lodge #23 and, one 
block south, the two-­toned classical Pickaway County Courthouse, 
with its oddly positioned tower. The latter was designed in 1861 by a 
local carriage builder named William Doane, who had just taken up 
an interest in architecture. Several fine historic houses line South 
Court Street as far as the huge, medieval-­inspired, stone-­built Cas-
tle Inn. West Union Street has more historic gems including, at the 
corner of brick-­paved Scioto Street, the 1840s Clarke-­May House. It 
serves as the Pickaway County Historical Society’s museum (check 
its website for hours) with exhibits covering every historical period. 
One room showcases many Hopewell-­era flint, stone, and pottery 
tools from the area. Another highlight is a scale model of the Cir-
cleville Earthworks executed by a local dentist using dental plaster.
Octagons and Pumpkins. Though Circleville’s original octagonal 
courthouse is gone, a group of today’s local citizens (called the 
Roundtown Conservancy) have preserved an unusual example of a 
private octagonal house, the 1856 Gregg-­Crites House. They had it 
moved in 2004 from a Walmart building site to a safe location (440 
Crites Rd., where it is still awaiting restoration) and open it on occa-
sion for tours and events. The house is visible from Progress Park-
way on the southern edge of town, not far from the world’s largest 
pumpkin water tower—­the latter symbolizing the annual Circleville 
Pumpkin Show every October, when this pleasant town feels like 
the center of Ohio.
The tall Pickaway Masonic Lodge #23 is one of several extraordinarily exuberant nineteenth-­
century buildings in Circleville’s historic downtown.


--- PDF PAGE 86 ---

156
157
Upper Scioto Route
Upper Scioto Route
The words of Chief Logan’s famous lamentation are inscribed on a stone monument near 
the site of the ancient elm tree under which they were read.
CHIEF LOGAN AND HIS WORDS
Logan was born a Cayuga, in Pennsylvania, where he grew up with many 
settlers as friends. In 1770, he married a Shawnee woman and moved to the 
Ohio Country. He urged peace with settlers until some of them attacked his 
village, killing his mother and sister—­after which he led his people on raids of 
revenge against the settlers. He refused to attend the Pickaway Plains peace 
conference, but sent a speech which was read, according to legend, beneath 
an already ancient spreading elm tree: I appeal to any white man to say that 
he ever entered Logan’s cabin, but I gave him meat; that he ever came naked, 
but I clothed him . . . He will not turn his heel to save his life. Who is there to 
mourn for Logan? No one. The monument to his words stands near the site of 
the original “Logan Elm” (a replacement was planted in the 1960s).
betrayal and despair after the descent into violence. That violence 
had been building for some time despite those who, like Logan and 
Nonhelema, were inclined toward peace. Beginning in the previ-
ous century, Shawnee and Delaware peoples, driven westward by 
colonial settlement in the east, had established villages and farms 
here. But the continued encroachment by new colonists provoked 
the escalating conflicts leading up to Dunmore’s War—­which ended 
here on the Pickaway Plains.
Snake Den Mounds. At this privately owned earthwork site about 
seven miles northeast of Circleville, a set of three large mounds and 
a squircle (rounded rectangle) are defined by mowing and ringed 
by a large ditched enclosure. Magnetometry reveals long rows of 
pits and at least two post-­circles nearby (still to be investigated), 
along with another mound. Views from the gentle ridgetop site ex-
tend all the way to downtown Columbus. The Snake Den Mounds 
Preservation Society offers scheduled public hikes led by expert 
guides as well as group tours by appointment (consult its website).
COLUMBUS
The fast-­growing metro region of Columbus centers on state gov-
ernment and Ohio’s largest research university. The city maintains 
a lively arts and cultural scene and is home to the Ohio History 
Connection and its large museum.
Ohio Statehouse. On Capitol Square in the heart of downtown 
stands the distinctive and relatively modest Ohio Statehouse, begun 
in 1839. Designed in the Greek Revival style dominant at the time, 
it reflected the state’s—­and the nation’s—­democratic idealism. The 
austere cupola was modeled on the circular Tholos of Delphi, then 
just recently discovered in Greece. Its lower-­level walls contain rub-
ble footers taken from a large nearby mound; its destruction also 
provided clay for many of the bricks in the building’s inner walls. 
Huge murals in the rotunda commemorate 
scenes from the state’s history, including the 
1795 Treaty of Greenville, which forced the 
tribes to give up much of the land that would 
become the state of Ohio eight years later.
Urban Districts. Lively urban districts and his-
toric residential neighborhoods now stretch both north and south 
along High Street from downtown Columbus. To the south is the 
picturesque German Village, where brick streets and sidewalks 
connect block after block of small brick houses, interspersed with 
shops and eateries. More historic districts spread northward, with 
much lively commerce and entertainment stretching out along 
High Street to the huge campus of The Ohio State University. Ohio’s 
The Ohio Statehouse is a good example of Greek 
Revival monumental architecture, reflecting the 
democratic aspirations of the nation in the early 1800s.


--- PDF PAGE 87 ---

158
159
Upper Scioto Route
Upper Scioto Route
The Ohio History Connection’s extensive and wide-­ranging exhibits occupy a massive 
concrete cube from the 1970s.
The Jeffers Mound was part of this 
geometric earthwork complex illustrated 
in Squier and Davis’s Ancient Monuments 
of the Mississippi Valley.
flagship research university boasts renowned departments in many 
disciplines, prodigious research programs, and top-­tier sports 
teams. The campus is also home to the world-­famous Wexner Cen-
ter for the Arts (with changing exhibits) designed by architect Peter 
Eisenman in the 1980s.
Ohio History Center. Several blocks east of the Ohio State University 
campus (800 East 17th Ave.) is the Ohio History Center, home of 
the Ohio History Connection with its collections, exhibits, shops, 
and offices. It is housed in a massive Brutalist concrete edifice—­a 
fine example of that often-­despised style from the 1970s. Exhibits 
both permanent and temporary portray many themes in the state’s 
history—­including settlement, transportation, industry, education, 
and sports—­and a justly famous mastodon named “Conway.” An ex-
hibit installed in 2022 called Indigenous Wonders of Our World high-
lights the UNESCO-­inscribed earthworks and includes a display of 
ancient artistry co-­curated with significant tribal consultation. The 
large Ohio History Connection campus also includes Ohio Village, 
a collection of historic structures assembled from throughout the 
state and filled with shops, crafts, interpretive displays, and living 
history programs.
Ohio History Connection. In 1885, a group of dedicated individu-
als founded the Ohio State Archaeological and Historical Society. 
The national significance of Ohio’s earthwork sites was well-­known 
through important early publications—­most notably Squier and 
Davis’s Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley—­and this created 
a problem. Eastern universities like Harvard were sending people 
out west to study the sites, who would then take collections back 
east. The goal was to have an Ohio-­based organization to do archae-
ological research and maintain collections in the state. Within just 
a few years, property acquisitions were also underway, notably 
at Fort Ancient and Serpent 
Mound. A name change in the 
1950s dropped “archaeological” 
from the title; another in the 
2010s established the current 
“Ohio History Connection.” Supported today by both state and pri-
vate funds, the organization manages over fifty historic sites and 
museums statewide. Since 2009, it has implemented active consul-
tation with the tribes descended from those who signed the Treaty 
of Greenville concerning artifact repatriation and all matters to do 
with the state’s Indigenous history.
Jeffers Mound. Surviving on a residential side street in the pleasant 
suburb of Worthington (in a small park across from 6430 Plesen-
ton Dr.), the twenty-­foot-­high Jeffers Mound was the focal point of a 
larger eight-­acre complex atop this sixty-­foot bluff overlooking the 
Olentangy River (pronounced oh-­lun-­TAN-­jee). The whole ensem-
ble consisted of a rectangular enclosure wall about three feet high, 
aligned to the cardinal points, and two circles. In the late 1970s, 
archaeologists located the postholes of a Hopewell-­era building 
whose rounded-­corner-­rectangular plan is now outlined on the 
ground near the mound. The site is maintained by the Worthington 
Historical Society, and visitors are urged to respect the quiet neigh-
borhood surroundings.
	
A small cemetery along the Overlook Trail in 
Highbanks Metro Park preserves beautifully 
carved headstones.
The earthen wall and ditch at Highbanks 
are especially prominent near the 
spot where the trail passes through them.


--- PDF PAGE 88 ---

160
161
Upper Scioto Route
Upper Scioto Route
The Shrum Mound stands in a small peaceful park northwest of downtown Columbus, one of the 
few mounds remaining in the area.
TO THE WORLD HERITAGE ROUTE
From greater Columbus, it is a short, direct connection to the World Heritage Route at 
Granville (page 85), either by taking State Route 161 from the northern part of the city 
via New Albany, or by heading directly out from downtown on Broad Street through 
Bexley (State Route 16).
TO THE UPPER MIAMI ROUTE
Heading southwest from greater Columbus, through London and South Charleston, 
leads to Cedarville, Clifton, and the Upper Miami Route (see map, page 105). Along 
the southwestern edges of the Columbus metropolitan region, large expanses of 
parkland line Big Darby Creek (a designated scenic river). Battelle Darby Creek Metro 
Park includes forests, wetlands, many amenities, and fields of ranging bison.
Highbanks Metro Park. A large park just north of Columbus (en-
trance at 9466 Columbus Pike, Lewis Center) contains two Adena-­
era mounds and a semicircular earthen enclosure reached by trails 
from the park’s Nature Center. The name “Highbanks” refers not to 
the ancient earthwork but to the 110-­foot exposed shale precipice 
falling from the site to the Olentangy River. The 2.3-­mile Overlook 
Trail passes through dense woods, through steep ravines, and be-
side a preserved cemetery plot, before entering the earthwork en-
closure across its watery outer ditch. The wall’s 1,500-­foot length 
was designed to encircle the promontory, diminishing on both 
sides along steep-­sided ravines. A long extension of the wall is visi-
ble to the north and west; the circuit was probably a village bound-
ary between eight and fourteen centuries ago.
Ferris-­Wright Park and Earthworks. North of the city, in a newly de-
veloped park (4400 Emerald Pkwy., Dublin), lie the partially visible 
remains of at least three small earthwork enclosures of Hopewell 
vintage. Prominent undulations north of the property’s restored 
farmhouse outline a 160-­foot-­diameter circle and its interior ditch. 
Just to the northeast of this circle, differential plantings present a 
130-­by-­300-­foot rectangular enclosure that once stood 6 feet high. In 
the far northeast corner of the park (and just half on the property), 
a third enclosure is also worn down by farming and not easily seen 
today. The park’s signage and infrastructure designs feature some 
of the best-­known symbols from Hopewell ceremonial artistry.
Shrum Mound. About five miles northwest of downtown Columbus 
(3141 McKinley Ave.), the well-­preserved 20-­foot-­tall Shrum Mound 
stands in the center of tiny Campbell Memorial Park. Despite the 
surroundings, the immediate setting provides a sense of tranquil-
ity, bordered by a low, symmetrical stone wall and a line of trees. 
This is one of the last ancient mounds left in the Columbus area, 
now named after the family that donated it to the Ohio History Con-
nection. Its conical form and isolated position suggest an Adena-­
era burial mound, although there have been no archaeological 
investigations to confirm that. The park, named after former Ohio 
governor James E. Campbell, is suspended between a gigantic old 
limestone quarry on one side, and rushing road traffic on the other, 
suggesting how close the mound came to being destroyed.


--- PDF PAGE 89 ---

163
Lower Scioto Route
162
Ancient Teays Valley. Southeast of Chillicothe rise the steep, widely 
spaced bluffs of the Scioto River’s ancient preglacial valley. Eons 
ago, North America’s largest river flowed northward through here 
before the glaciers gradually dammed it up, producing a huge lake 
and then today’s Ohio River channel. Follow the valley on Three 
Locks Road, or take US Route 23 directly to Waverly. The historic 
Emmitt House Hotel, this town’s premiere historic site, burned 
down in 2014, but Canal Park (211 Ford Ave.) preserves a bit of the 
old waterway’s stonework, and the Pike Heritage Museum (110 
South Market St.) occupies an 1859 former German Evangelical 
church with a tall brick tower. Between Waverly and Piketon, the 
valley’s eastern bluffs open where another equally wide Teays-­age 
river channel comes in from the east. Vast, and also visible from 
space (or Google satellite view), it is now drained only by the tiny 
meandering Big Beaver Creek.
Mound Cemetery. Leave Waverly on US Route 23 and, just past 
Piketon, go east on State Route 32, and then turn left on Mound 
Cemetery Road. The cemetery is dominated by a large Adena-­era 
conjoined mound topped by a flag and surrounded by graves both 
old and new. Early settlers often recognized the ancient mounds as 
sacred sites of burial, and one way of attempting respect and ensur-
ing preservation was to plan new cemeteries around them—­here as 
at Newtown, Marietta, and elsewhere. The large primary mound 
8
Lower Scioto Route
The broad Scioto Valley heads south from Chillicothe to Waverly and 
the Tremper Mound, then to Portsmouth with remains of a huge 
complex of earthworks at the most dramatic river confluence in the 
region; well-­preserved sections stand across the river in Kentucky. A 
loop to Jackson enters the Hanging Rock region with unusual glacial-­
era geology, a restored landmark of Ohio’s early iron industry, and 
the Indigenous petroglyphs near the village of Leo.
A large cemetery just south of Piketon preserves a complex, conjoined, Adena-­era mound.


--- PDF PAGE 90 ---

164
165
Lower Scioto Route
Lower Scioto Route
Despite speculations to the contrary, the 
archaeological record confirms that this 
majestic ancient earthen portal is now 
nowhere to be found.
The reconstructed remains of the Tremper Mound are enclosed by an oval earthwork,  
both enhanced today by differential mowing.
links to smaller segments by an unusual undulating “apron” form. 
Somewhere just south of here along the road to Portsmouth was the 
location of the Piketon Graded Way, strikingly illustrated by Squier 
and Davis, but long since lost to road construction.
TREMPER MOUND
This irregularly shaped Hopewell-­era mound is known for the 
exquisitely carved effigy smoking pipes found beneath it in 1915; 
today, in its grand valley setting, it is beautifully presented by inter-
pretive mowing and thoughtful signage.
Orientation. Along the western (right) bank of the Scioto, State 
Route 104 traces the Ohio and Erie Canal’s abandoned channel to-
ward Portsmouth. Just south of the intersection with State Route 73, 
Tremper Mound rises in an open field, now owned and managed by 
the Arc of Appalachia (consult its website for visitor information). 
A well-­marked entrance leads to a parking area, and a kiosk fea-
turing paintings by noted muralist Robert Dafford announces the 
path into the sacred precinct. Differential mowing clearly defines 
the mound’s subtle forms and oval enclosure wall, while wooded 
hills and giant shade trees frame this high, open terrace site mag-
nificently. The aura of an ancient landscape can be felt powerfully 
here, free of modern intrusions.
The Earthwork. One of the earliest and most important Hopewell 
sites, Tremper dates from the late first century BCE. The mound 
vaguely suggests some kind of animal, but more likely corresponds 
(as at other sites) to the floor plan of the complex, multichambered 
mortuary building whose ritual remains it was built to cover. That 
structure’s floor held twelve fire basins and the accumulated, cre-
mated remains of about 300 people. More than 500 items were 
laid down in a communal offering, all of them purposely broken.  
In 1915, archaeologist William Mills of what is now the Ohio His-
tory Connection excavated the mound, made detailed notes about 
the building and its contents, and then restored the earthwork to an 
approximation of its original form.
The Tremper Pipes. Tremper is best known for its 136 stone-­carved 
smoking pipes. Sixty of the pipe bowls were elegantly carved to 
portray the creatures common in Ohio Valley woods, meadows, 
and skies—­turtles, bears, frogs, wolves, birds, and more. The de-
tails of their faces, paws, bills, and wings are both intricate and en-
dearing: A bobcat’s whiskers are delicately incised; a beaver’s eyes 
are inset pearls. Many of the pipes have near twins in the set found 
six decades earlier by Squier and Davis at Mound City, forty miles 
upstream along the Scioto. Expert analysis has recently suggested 
that pipes in the two collections may be the work of the same four 
or five master artists. The stone came from Minnesota and Illinois, 
even though there was an available source just a few miles away. 
The pipes are now in the collections (though not on exhibit) at the 
Ohio History Connection.


--- PDF PAGE 91 ---

166
167
Lower Scioto Route
Lower Scioto Route
Shops, cafés, a brewery, and historic 
storefronts line the Boneyfiddle District 
near Portsmouth’s riverfront.
PORTSMOUTH
A huge and elaborate Hopewell earthwork complex once sprawled 
across the grandest river confluence in the region; here at the mouth 
of the Scioto, parallel-­walled roadways headed off in all directions.
History and Setting. Portsmouth occupies the spectacular set-
ting where two of the region’s largest valleys converge. The Ohio 
River is joined here by the Scioto flowing down from the Hopewell 
heartland. A multi-­component earthwork complex once filled this 
dramatic valley, linked by wide walled roadways. At this major 
crossroads, especially for river traffic, settlement seems to have 
been continuous; early European traders found a thriving Shawnee 
town along these riverbanks. Today, the city retains some historic 
urban fabric, with shops and cafés, in its Boneyfiddle District and 
nearby downtown. The important cultural sites include a fine mu-
seum, a long series of justly famous riverside murals, and (across 
in Kentucky) a well-­preserved geometric earthwork. A small park 
at the end of Front Street overlooks the Scioto confluence. The his-
tory of the city and the surrounding region is told in a thorough 
website and mobile app created by Shawnee State University, called 
Scioto Historical.
Mound Park. The Portsmouth Earthworks once stretched for miles 
across terraces on both sides of the Ohio River. The best-­preserved 
section on the Ohio side stands in Mound Park (1817 Grant St.), 
where a single large horseshoe-­
shaped earthwork opens to the 
south and rises to a height of ten 
feet at its closed northern end. 
The 1848 map shows that there 
was a pair of these, with a circle 
around them, from which earthen lines extended in every direc-
tion, even across the Ohio River in what is now Kentucky. At least 
ten miles of these walled roadways connected several remarkable 
features in this giant valley. Two ringed mounds once stood up-
stream on the Kentucky side. A square called the “Old Fort” is still 
visible on a downstream terrace, also in Kentucky. Another pair of 
lines headed northwest toward 
the Scioto and could once have 
led to ancient points north, in-
cluding the Tremper Mound.
Floodwall Murals. Portsmouth’s ancient earthworks are illustrated 
on an ambitious series of murals decorating the city’s floodwall—­a 
heroic act of compensation for the loss of its riverfront setting. 
Monumental, detailed, immersive paintings by Robert Dafford 
stretch for nearly half a mile, vividly telling the history of this lo-
cation from antiquity to the present. The chronological sequence 
begins at the eastern end (629 Front St.), where the first panel por-
trays the Sun rising over the ancient earthworks, and the second 
overlooks the large Indigenous settlement here, Lower Shawnee-
town. Many of the images are trompe l’oeil—­with period views to 
the river as if the wall weren’t there at all. A nearby opening offers 
access to riverbank parklands below, with a historical marker com-
memorating Portsmouth’s river history, and good views of the steep 
Kentucky hills and the suspension bridge.
A virtual tour of the ancient Portsmouth 
landscape reveals the many mounds, 
enclosures, and walled roadways that 
once spread out across the terraces of the 
Scioto and Ohio River confluence. 
(Link to animation is on page 205.)


--- PDF PAGE 92 ---

168
169
Lower Scioto Route
Lower Scioto Route
Southern Ohio Museum. An im-
pressive classical bank building 
downtown is now the home of 
the Southern Ohio Museum and 
Cultural Center (825 Gallia St., 
consult its website for hours), with both permanent and changing 
exhibits on local history and the visual arts, and a performing arts 
schedule. In the center’s Wertz Gallery, an exhibit entitled Art of 
the Ancients showcases over 10,000 objects from the Adena and 
Hopewell cultures, and from the area’s other Indigenous inhabi-
tants. Portsmouth residents Charles and William Wertz, father and 
son, gathered this massive collection from nearby plowed fields 
throughout much of the twentieth century. Many of the items are 
elegantly displayed and interpreted, though equally impressive in a 
way are the shelves at the back crammed with prodigious numbers 
of stone axes, spear points, and other ancient tools.
Old Fort Earthworks. The largest 
surviving part of the Portsmouth 
Earthworks complex is its south-
western extension: an 800-­foot, 
diagonally oriented square en-
closure across the river in Kentucky. The site was preserved with 
help from the Archaeological Conservancy, and although not yet 
outfitted for visitors it is clearly visible from the highway in two 
spots. About 3,000 feet southwest from the US Route 23 bypass 
bridge, a large mound appears next to the road on the right—­it is 
the square’s eastern corner. After another 1,000 feet or so, a ceme-
tery on the left (Collier Memorial Gardens, 1805 Kentucky Route 8, 
South Portsmouth) offers the only place to pull off the road, across 
from a historical marker about Shannoah (Lower Shawneetown). 
Across an open field, the square’s southwestern wall stands promi-
nently on the right beneath a line of trees. The whole figure shows 
Muralist Robert Dafford’s depiction of the 
sun rising over ancient Portsmouth, with 
its two horseshoe mounds, begins the 
riverfront’s historical mural series.
The Southern Ohio Museum and Cultural 
Center presents a huge and rare collection 
of ancient Indigenous artistry in its 
Wertz Gallery.
At least two walls of the Old Fort Earthworks’ diagonal square are essentially intact today 
beneath tree lines.
LIGHT AND SHADOW
Archaeologist A. Gwynn Henderson considers earthwork design as an 
exercise in working with light and shadow, as well as site and position: 
These are people who live in the outdoors all the time. They see the interplay 
of light and shadow, moonlight and sunlight and starlight, and so forth. And 
these people have had millennia of understanding what those stars, and 
the celestial bodies, are doing. . . . If the individuals who were in charge of 
planning this took into consideration this power of 
light and shadow—­well, that’s what architects do, 
isn’t it? Take a look at the spot, think about the goal 
that you have in building that structure, and play it 
off against the land and what you’re building. That’s 
what architects do. That’s what these people were. 
(Link to video is on page 205.)
clearly in Google terrain view, providing a good orientation to the 
portions that are visible from the highway. The northwestern wall 
turns right in the distance near the railroad line. (The earthwork is 
on private land and not otherwise accessible.)


--- PDF PAGE 93 ---

170
171
Lower Scioto Route
Lower Scioto Route
Huge, eroded sandstone blocks stand strangely on ridgetops in the Ohio Hanging Rock 
Preserve northeast of Portsmouth.
Lower Shawneetown. By the mid-­ 
1700s, a large American Indian 
town stood overlooking the Scioto-­
Ohio confluence. It was a place of 
meeting and interchange for the 
tribal groups arriving from the east—­the Shawnee, Delaware, and 
others—­who were being driven out by advancing colonial settlement. 
The population reached at least 1,200, which at the time made it one of 
the largest towns in the West. The convergence of Indigenous routes 
and two great rivers made it a major center for early trade with the 
Europeans, especially in furs. The size and diversity of its population 
also made it the setting for diplomatic maneuverings by the French 
and British as they brokered tribal alliances in support of their own 
conflicts. Initially the town was on the south bank just below the Old 
Fort Earthworks, but satellite towns also formed across the river, and 
the sector where Portsmouth now stands soon became the largest.
Raven Rock. Directly across the Ohio River and just a bit to the left, 
is a steep 500-­foot bluff. A sandstone promontory is flanked by two 
long ridges; Google terrain view vividly reveals the formation’s re-
semblance to a bird in flight. With sweeping views of the Scioto 
confluence and several miles of the Ohio River in each direction 
(and today the city of Portsmouth), this high lookout was used by 
Indigenous people to monitor traffic on the rivers, including set-
tlers arriving on their flatboats. The rugged, forested land is now 
a state nature preserve visitable by permit from the Ohio Depart-
ment of Natural Resources.
TO THE BRUSH CREEK ROUTE
State Route 125 between Portsmouth and West Union (the Brush Creek Route) passes 
through the 63,000-­acre Shawnee State Forest; its rugged lands comprise one of the 
region’s largest dark-­Sky zones. At its center, Shawnee State Park has an extensive 
trail system, several lodging options, and layered-­ridge vistas earning it the nickname 
“Little Smokies.”
TWO ROUTES TO JACKSON
East of Portsmouth and north out of Sciotoville, State Routes 335 and 776 follow 
another of the huge ancient valleys of the preglacial Teays River system. Like the 
Scioto Valley to the west, its form is prominent on terrain or satellite maps. A more 
circuitous route to Jackson heads northeast from Sciotodale on State Route 140, 
winding through narrow, wooded hollows, and giving access to the spectacular, 
challenging trails of the Ohio Hanging Rock Preserve.
Ohio Hanging Rock Preserve. One of the Arc of Appalachia’s most 
remote and astonishing preserves (2067-­1143 Frederick Rd., Wheel-
ersburg) offers a challenging 4.4-­mile loop trail with several stren-
uous climbs and descents leading to some of Ohio’s most unusual 
geology. Huge blocks of eroded rock stand implausibly on the high 
hillsides. These ridgetops were once islands in the huge lake cre-
ated across the region when, for at least 6,000 years, the glaciers 
held back the waters of the Teays River as it flowed north out of the 
high Appalachians. Over time, the lake’s redirected waters carved 
the Ohio River’s current route. (Consult the Arc’s website for trail 
information.)
Jackson. As early as 1795, a small settlement here was called “Salt 
Lick Town” for the rare salt deposits in the area. This essential 
mineral had been drawing animals and people here for millennia, 
Portsmouth’s riverfront mural 
series includes a depiction of Lower 
Shawneetown, a large American Indian 
trading center in the mid-­1700s.


--- PDF PAGE 94 ---

172
173
Lower Scioto Route
Lower Scioto Route
The restored iron-­smelting complex at 
Buckeye Furnace illustrates mid-­1800s 
industrial techniques.
The Buckeye Furnace charging shed, 
with its giant scoop, was used to feed the 
smelting fires from above.
and the earliest area roads were repurposed ancient buffalo trails. 
The settlers stripped the forests to fuel salt production by boiling 
saltwater from the licks. This industrial-­scale approach depleted 
not only the salt but also the forests as early as 1810. But by 1830, 
Welsh immigrants to the area had discovered coal deposits nearby. 
From their experience back home, they knew what to do with it, 
and southeast Ohio’s important nineteenth-­century iron industry 
was born.
Buckeye Furnace. The story of Ohio’s iron industry is best told today 
at the beautifully reconstructed Buckeye Furnace State Memorial 
(123 Buckeye Park Rd., Wellston), reached via State Route 124 east 
out of Jackson. The approach road passes watery lowlands before 
the massive stone blast furnace complex appears on the left. The 
mouth of the charcoal-­fired oven is visible behind an open-­air 
casting shed; an engine house to the left used steam heat from the 
furnace to drive air compressors, increasing the heat of the fire.  
A timber superstructure above the chimney (reachable by a sepa-
rate trail) was the charging shed where the iron ore and limestone 
were measured in from above. A large open-­air shed, also on the 
hilltop, stored the huge quantities of materials needed to keep the 
furnace running continuously. The former company store now  
offers visitor orientation, while the ironmaster’s house and a covered 
bridge stand nearby on the grounds.
Ohio’s Iron Industry. Buckeye Furnace is typical of many such fa-
cilities that dotted Ohio’s Hanging Rock Iron Region during its 
prosperous decades in the mid-­1800s. Many small company towns 
of 300–­400 residents operated the furnaces, producing iron for 
America’s early industry and for the Union forces in the Civil War. 
All the raw ingredients were locally plentiful: wood for fires, lime-
stone for flux, and the iron ore itself. Vast tracts of forest were de-
pleted in the process, and families were conscripted in servitude. 
These isolated, self-­contained communities had their own schools, 
churches, and commerce; even currencies were wholly controlled 
by the company store.
Leo Petroglyphs. Between Jackson and Chillicothe, leave the main 
highway (US Route 35) to visit the Leo Petroglyphs State Memorial 
(about a half mile northwest from the village of Leo, at 400 Park Rd., 
Ray). Centuries ago, Indigenous people carved thirty-­seven images onto 
the top of an exposed dome of sandstone, including outlines of birds, 
fish, feet, and hands, as well as human and composite creatures. From 
the weathering of the rock and the nature of the symbols, experts think 
the petroglyphs are less than a thousand years old. Indecipherable 
today, the Leo Petroglyphs suggest what may well have been a visual 
language with specific meanings. In 1780, the Moravian missionary 
David Zeisberger observed that the Indigenous people along the 
Muskingum River left marks in charcoal or red pigment on forest 
trees, using symbols that others 
could read, about hunting or 
fighting successes, or just having 
passed by.
TO THE HOCKING ROUTE
From Buckeye Furnace, return via Berlin Crossroads to take either State Route 93 
through Wellston and McArthur en route to Zaleski, or State Route 32 (called the 
James A. Rhodes Appalachian Highway) to Athens, Nelsonville, and the Hocking Hills 
region (see map, page 174).
The Leo Petroglyphs are thought to date 
from the Fort Ancient culture that lived in 
this region between 900 and 1650 CE.


--- PDF PAGE 95 ---

175
Hocking Route
174
Rock cliffs, hemlock groves, rushing streams, and waterfalls help make the Hocking Hills 
region a hiker’s paradise.
Logan. This thriving town serves as the commercial anchor for 
the Hocking Hills region—­with many restaurants and bars lining 
its Main Street plus a brewery and a winery on the edge of town. 
The Hocking Hills Regional Welcome Center (13178 SR 664 Sce-
nic) offers information, directions, and lodging availability. Local 
history is presented at the Hocking County Historical and Gene-
alogical Society’s museum (64 North Culver St.), though the most 
unique attraction in town may be the tiny but nationally famous 
Paul A. Johnson Pencil Sharpener Museum (on the welcome center 
grounds), with over 3,000 units collected by a local minister over 
several decades. The Hocking River offers seventy miles of rela-
tively unspoiled scenery and boating between Logan and its con-
fluence with the Ohio; inquire locally about conditions and water 
levels.
Hocking Hills State Park. The several discontinuous units of this 
park provide amenities and access to the best of the region’s sce-
nic destinations. All are open from dawn to dusk, with trailhead 
parking, signage, and facilities. Many trails are one-­way, some are 
9
Hocking Route
Southeast from Lancaster, the Hocking River enters a region of espe-
cially beautiful scenery, nature preserves, and geological wonders, 
several of which are units of Hocking Hills State Park. The area is 
rich in tourism amenities, with many inns and cabins, and the towns 
of Logan and Nelsonville are commercial hubs. The route features 
the circuitous, scenic State Route 374, interesting ancient mounds 
in Zaleski and The Plains, and finally Athens, the home of Ohio Uni-
versity, from where the river continues its course to the Ohio River.


--- PDF PAGE 96 ---

176
177
Hocking Route
Hocking Route
quite challenging, and most involve substantial stair climbing. The 
Ohio Department of Natural Resources website offers guides to the 
various units as well as links to other parks, preserves, and state 
and national forests in the region. The area’s amenities and accom-
modations become crowded during the summer, but they are no 
less beautiful—­maybe more so—­during other seasons. The popu-
larity of these places also means that many other online resources 
present beautiful photographs 
and thorough trail descriptions 
to help with prioritizing where 
to go. What follows here are 
brief descriptions of the major 
park units, sequenced along State 
Route 374 from north to south.
Cantwell Cliffs. A trailhead park-
ing lot (13640 SR 374, Rockbridge) 
gives access to this less-­visited 
northernmost unit of the state 
park with its rugged trails: both 
along the clifftop with long vistas, 
and into narrow gorge passages 
UNIQUE GEOLOGY
This well-­developed tourism region, between the Hocking and Scioto 
rivers, has dramatic topography. It deserves its popularity among scenery 
lovers, adventurers, day trippers, families, and history buffs. The landscape 
here results from its 200-­foot-­thick layer of Black Hand Sandstone, laid down 
by the shallow sea that once covered Ohio and then was uplifted by pressure 
from the formation of the Appalachian Mountains. Over the 300 million years 
since, the many small streams draining this uplifted mass of soft, layered rock 
have carved a maze of cliff-­faced canyons, waterfalls, caves, and rock shelters—­
still full of remnant cold-­climate plant species like birch and hemlock left from 
when the glaciers loomed just twenty miles to the west.
The sandstone cliffs and narrow passages 
at Cantwell Cliffs have been sculpted by 
eons of erosion.
The eroded sandstone galleries of Rock House create a stunning natural effect analogous 
to a Gothic portico, framing vistas out over the stream and the ancient forest.
among sheer cliffs and rock shelters. The one-­mile one-­way loop 
(about an hour and a half, with many steps) descends quickly 
from a shelter house to its narrowest portion, called “Fat Woman’s 
Squeeze.”
Rock House. A mile-­long loop trail (again with many steps) leads 
to the most unique cliffside formations in the region—­in fact, the 
only true cave (16350 SR 374, Laurelville). Deeply sculpted, colorful 
canyon walls lead to hanging gardens of native plants and to the 
amazing “house” itself—­eroded chambers within the middle layers 
of the sandstone cliff face that have been formed into a covered 
corridor. The effect is of a row of natural arches, evoking the side 
aisle of a Gothic cathedral, and framing views out to the forest and 
the stream below. American Indians used small recesses in the 
back wall as ovens and cut water-­holding pits in the floor, which 
still fill with spring water in rainy seasons.


--- PDF PAGE 97 ---

178
179
Hocking Route
Hocking Route
Hocking Hills State Park’s largest cascade 
is Cedar Falls, about a three-­mile hike 
southeast from Old Man’s Cave.
Conkle’s Hollow. The trailhead at Conkle’s Hollow State Nature Pre-
serve (24858 Big Pine Rd., Rockbridge) leads to another rugged, 
rocky gorge—­one of the deepest in the region. Ferns and wildflow-
ers grow in profusion in the dark reaches beneath thick, towering 
stands of birch and hemlock. The lower trail (three-­quarters of a 
mile, wheelchair accessible) penetrates the chasm between verti-
cal cliffs towering more than 200 feet high and narrowing to less 
than 300 feet wide by the end of the gorge’s half-­mile length. A 
strenuous one-­way rim trail is two miles long, and especially beau-
tiful during fall leaf season.
Old Man’s Cave. Adjacent to its lodge and visitor center, this is the 
state park’s most popular unit (19988 SR 664 Scenic, Logan). Several 
trails and bridges connect to a giant rock shelter partway up the 
face of a cliff, to upper and lower waterfalls, and to both rims of the 
half-­mile-­long canyon. The popular Grandma Gatewood Trail goes 
from here to Cedar Falls and Ash Cave. The “old man” of the cave’s 
name was a hermit, Richard Rowe, who arrived in the area in 1796 
and is buried nearby. Also adjacent to the park’s visitor center, the 
John Glenn Astronomy Park offers weather-­dependent programs in 
night Sky viewing and astronomical interpretation. A circular plaza 
tracks the sun’s marking of the seasons. This rural location is free 
of light pollution, so visitors are invited to bring telescopes, or just 
their eyes, to appreciate the views of the night Sky. The park is a 
project of the Friends of Hocking Hills State Park, who maintain its 
independent website.
Cedar Falls. A half-­mile trail leads from a parking area (21560 SR 
374, Logan) to the largest-­volume waterfall in the state park, pass-
ing through another rock-­walled 
canyon with grottoes and stands 
of hemlock. A highlight of Cedar 
Falls is the artist and mathema-
tician Akio Hizume’s Democracy 
Steps—­a 100-­step section of the 
descending trail carefully de-
signed to vary and choreograph 
the rhythms of movement and the patterns of foot placement, mak-
ing the visitor experience more interesting as well as relaxing. En 
route to Ash Cave from here, the iron-­framed Ash Cave Fire Tower 
(erected in 1934) is open for intrepid climbers. From a small park-
ing lot at State Route 374 and Chapel Ridge Road, a 550-­foot section 
of the Grandma Gatewood Trail leads south to the base of the tower. 
Open stairs climb 80 feet for wide views from well above the tree-
tops, but the room at the top is kept locked.
Ash Cave. A relatively short and easy trail leads from a parking 
area to the most breathtaking feature in Hocking Hills State Park 
(27292 SR 56, South Bloomingville). Its quarter-­mile length follows 
a narrow wooded gorge until the 
700-­foot-­wide curved overhang 
suddenly appears. A stream of 
water falls from its rim 90 feet 
above into a small pool, echo-
ing within the huge cave’s eerie 
acoustics. The name derives 
from the nearly 100 cubic yards 
of ash that had been left in the 
cave by untold centuries of 
American Indian fires, along 
with the remains of food prepa-
ration. Ash Cave was a stopping 
point on a principal Indige-
nous trail (now State Route 56) 
connecting the Kanawha Valley 
(in West Virginia) with the Shaw-
nee towns of the Scioto Valley 
and points west.
ZALESKI STATE FOREST
Ohio’s second-­largest state forest wilderness covers nearly 28,000 
acres of winding ridgetops and remote hollows, with long single-­ 
or multiday backpacking trails from Lake Hope State Park or the 
village of Zaleski.
The splendor and shelter of Ash Cave 
has made it a favored destination 
since time immemorial.


--- PDF PAGE 98 ---

180
181
Hocking Route
Hocking Route
The largest survivor of the Zaleski Mound Group stands in a beautiful grove of trees near 
the headquarters of the Zaleski State Forest.
The Moonville Tunnel’s many tragedies during its use by a now-­long-­abandoned 
railroad have inspired persistent local legends about paranormal activities.
Zaleski Mound Group. Remote state and county roads link the Hock-
ing region with the small village of Zaleski and the state forest of the 
same name. From a group of six mounds, three remain today, two 
of which are visible to the public. The largest, called Ranger Station 
Mound, is one of the most beautiful in Ohio, and stands adjacent to 
the state forest facility (114 Broadway St., Zaleski). The 15-­foot-­tall 
mound has a graceful profile—­a subtle variation on spherical and 
conical form—­and is ringed by a gravel path and a partial circle of 
young trees. A small veterans memorial is nearby. About 1,000 feet 
south along Broadway Street stands the Methodist Church Mound, 
about half the size, behind a small church building. The mounds 
at Zaleski were built by people of the Adena culture who thrived in 
this area of abundant game, fish, and water transport—­as well as a 
prized local Zaleski Flint.
Lake Hope State Park. Four miles north of Zaleski, this state park 
surrounds a 120-­acre lake and offers boating, mountain biking, 
beaver habitat, many cabins, ruins of the Hope Furnace, and pit-­
barbecue locavore dining at the Lake Hope Lodge (27331 SR 278, 
McArthur, inquire for hours). Just across Shea Road is the rebuilt 
Hope Schoolhouse (27800 Wheelabout Rd., McArthur), now an 
interpretive center telling the stories of the area’s history and its 
Hope iron industry settlement. The Selinde Roosenburg Memorial 
Backpack Trail offers long loops (a ten-­mile day hike or multiday 
routes) throughout the Zaleski State Forest, with trailheads and in-
terpretive materials at the park and schoolhouse.
Moonville Tunnel. Adjacent to the stream just north of the Hope 
Schoolhouse, a repurposed 1800s railroad bed—­the Moonville Rail 
Trail—­extends for miles in both directions. A two-­mile walk east (or 
a three-­mile drive on winding, densely forested Shea Road) reaches 
the celebrated Moonville Tunnel. Its brick-­faced, brick-­lined, 300-­
foot cavern is one of many abandoned rail tunnels in this remote, 
rugged region, but now unique both for its accessibility and for the 
appeal of the local legends associated with its tragic history (read-
ily found online). From the ample trailhead parking, an iron bridge 
(laden with padlocks like Florence’s Ponte Vecchio) leads to the tunnel 
entrance. Nearby in the forest are scant remains of the Moonville 
settlement, whose population never exceeded 100, and its cemetery. 
Another three miles east along the Moonville Rail Trail is the King’s 
Hollow Tunnel, framed out in massive one-­foot-­square oak timbers 
instead of brick or stone, though not easily reachable by car.
ATHENS
Ohio University at Athens was the first to be established west of the 
Alleghenies, in a section of the Hocking Valley filled with promi-
nent Adena-­era mounds and earthworks.
History and the University. The New Englanders who came to set-
tle southeast Ohio in 1788 believed in education. Their Ohio Com-
pany of Associates, when founding Marietta, set aside two whole 
townships of their remaining lands for the “American Western Uni-
versity” to be modeled on the ones back home—­Yale and Harvard. 


--- PDF PAGE 99 ---

182
183
Hocking Route
Hocking Route
THE PLAINS
This village immediately northwest of Athens occupies an unusual 
flat terrace above the Hocking River, among abruptly rising hills; it 
was once one of the largest concentrations of Adena-­era mounds 
and earthworks.
History and Setting. Two prominent mounds remain in this valley, 
standing among suburban streets and houses, the surviving rem-
nants of the Wolf Plains Mounds and Earthworks. After about 300 
BCE, people gathered here and covered this level ground with at 
least thirty earthen mounds and circles. There is no evidence of an-
cient dwelling sites on the terrace, suggesting that they lived in the 
surrounding hills (where there are more mounds) and descended 
to the plain for ceremonies. Today, 
only two large mounds can be read-
ily seen; other low mounds and cir-
cles are barely detectable in fields or 
beneath buildings.
Hartman Mound. The largest of the 
two mounds remaining in The 
Plains is the Hartman Mound, 
standing 40 feet high and 140 feet 
in diameter (26 Mound St.). Its 
unusually steep profile has never 
been excavated but probably con-
tains graves similar to the one found 
during the 1800s excavation of a 
smaller mound nearby, where the 
deceased lay in a log tomb, sur-
rounded by 500 rolled copper beads 
and a tubular pipe. Although there 
is an implied pathway to the top, 
climbing is not encouraged, out of 
respect for both the ancient graves 
and the private landowner.
Reflecting their idealism, the founders named their university town 
“Athens” after the Greek birthplace of Western civilization. It was the 
first college west of the Allegheny Mountains, and in 1804, the year 
after statehood, the new Ohio legislature renamed it “Ohio Univer-
sity.” The oldest campus building, dating from 1816, is Cutler Hall, 
named after one of Marietta’s (and the university’s) founders. Athens 
has long nourished a local food culture; products from innovative 
growers, chefs, and craftspeople are showcased in its uptown area 
and in nearby Nelsonville. Local history is told at the Southeast Ohio 
History Center (24 West State St.). Athens County also originated the 
“quilt barn” phenomenon, whereby owners paint large distinctive 
quilt squares on their barns (inquire locally for quilt barn tour routes).
The Ridges. On a hill across the Hocking River from the university, 
the Kennedy Museum of Art (100 Ridges Circle, Athens) houses im-
pressive collections including significant Southwest Native American 
art, weaving, and jewelry, given by alumni and benefactors Edwin 
and Ruth Kennedy. The museum and other university functions are 
housed at The Ridges—­the sprawling and ominous Victorian rem-
nants of a huge nineteenth-­century mental health asylum. On the 
same hill is the Dairy Barn Arts Center (8000 Dairy Ln.), another of 
Athens’s outstanding arts venues, and home to the most significant 
art quilt show in the nation: Quilt National, held every two years. 
From the Dairy Barn, a walking path leads to Athens’s (and the 
old asylum’s) historic cemeteries, and to the top of Radar Hill with  
broad views.
Several of Ohio University’s earliest 
buildings still enclose the campus 
green, including a central one named 
after co-­founder Manasseh Cutler.
This lively university town centers on 
Court Street, with its shops and bars, as well 
as a tradition of innovative locavore 
markets and restaurants.
The large Hartman Mound in The 
Plains has an unusually steep and 
spherical form rather than conical.
The mounds and rings at The Plains 
exemplify the earth-­building and  
settlement traditions that archaeologists 
call Adena.


--- PDF PAGE 100 ---

184
185
Hocking Route
Hocking Route
ADENA AND HOPEWELL
Archaeologist Brad Lepper considers the modern names “Adena” and 
“Hopewell”—­what they do and don’t refer to, and how much of a distinction 
they represent: My feeling on it is that the Adena are simply early Hopewell, 
and Hopewell could be thought of as late Adena, and that there is a seamless 
cultural tradition, that there is no bright line separating one from the other. 
All of the interaction-­sphere elements have their beginnings in the Adena; 
they simply get elaborated. The extent of that interaction sphere broadens 
and the quantities of material increase. Earthworks 
are similarly configured; they just get bigger and 
grander in scale. It’s not to say that there weren’t 
cultural differences. Clearly, the Adena had practices 
that were altered, abandoned, or supplemented by 
later Hopewell developments, but the Hopewell do 
represent at least a quantitative explosion. (Link to 
video is on page 205.)
A collection of log structures at Robbins 
Crossing Historical Village sets the scene for 
interpretive programming about early-­
1800s life in southeast Ohio.
Woodruff-­Connett Mound. A few blocks away (424 Adena Dr.) stands 
the town’s other well-­preserved mound. At 15 feet high with a base 
diameter of 90 feet, the Woodruff-­Connett Mound is the largest of 
what was once a cluster of three. Along part of its base, a slightly 
elevated “apron” of Earth may belong to the ancient design; a slight 
swell in the grass nearby marks where a second mound once stood, 
about half the size. The mound sits on land preserved as open space 
by the Athens County Historical Society. Like the Hartman Mound, 
the Woodruff-­Connett has not been excavated, but is probably also 
a burial mound.
Research at The Plains. Investigations have revealed that the people 
who built these circles and mounds lived among the surrounding 
hills, descending to the plain below to work with their neighbors 
to build the earthworks and to join gatherings both ceremonial 
and social. In the 1980s, archaeologist Elliot Abrams of Ohio Uni-
versity studied a nearby mound (as it was being destroyed for a 
housing project) and found a central burial of a man in his fifties, 
surrounded by fourteen cremations. About forty shallow fire pits 
at various levels in the mound suggested people revisited it at in-
tervals, burning things and adding soil, for as long as four to six 
generations. This suggested to Abrams that the hill dwellers were 
bringing their already-­cremated kin to join that central figure—­
perhaps an honored Ancestor or leader. Small objects in the depos-
ited soil showed these people had connections with the Hopewell 
tradition, although in this valley more of the earlier Adena prac-
tices continued to dominate.
WAYNE NATIONAL FOREST
Along the highway between The Plains and Nelsonville, the visitor center for this 
huge well-­tended wilderness offers detailed historical and ecological information, 
as well as excellent maps of its many miles of every kind of trail in all three of the 
national forest’s large sections—­north and east of Athens, another east of Marietta, 
and another southeast of Portsmouth.
Hocking College. Students in two of this small college’s renowned 
programs welcome visitors to a pair of unique amenities. Robbins 
Crossing Historical Village (3301 Hocking Pkwy., Nelsonville), oper-
ated by the college’s Parks and Museum Education program, pres-
ents several early-­1800s shops and houses relocated from the area, 
plus programs and events on arts, crafts, and culture, such as log 
cabin construction, gardening, animal husbandry, and period med-
icine. (Check its website for events and opening times.) Students in 
the school’s Hospitality and Events Management program staff the 
nearby Lodge at Hocking College (15770 SR 691, Nelsonville). Its im-
pressive modern building is well appointed with furniture made by 
students and alumni using wood sourced on the campus property.
Nelsonville. The heart of this lively tourist town is the historic Public 
Square (at the corner of Hocking and Columbus Sts.), surrounded by 
galleries, cafés, restaurants, and the restored Stuart’s Opera House. 
The town was named for Daniel 
Nelson, who bought 200 acres 
here in 1814. After coal was found 
locally, the Hocking Valley coal 
industry thrived, with Nelsonville 
as the hub of the “Little Cities of 
Black Diamonds” (mining and 


--- PDF PAGE 101 ---

186
187
Hocking Route
industry towns to the north and east). When coal mining shifted to 
larger-­scale operations in West Virginia and Kentucky, Nelsonville 
turned to brickmaking. Bricks made with local clay are visible in 
streets and sidewalks around town, imprinted with their distinc-
tive marks (names, stars, and other shapes). A few of the large kilns 
and chimneys stand, in various states of ruin, in Nelsonville Brick 
Park at the west edge of town (580 Lake Hope Dr.). Nelsonville hosts 
many festivals and arts events, as well as the main station for the 
Hocking Valley Scenic Railway.
Haydenville. Upstream along the left bank of the Hocking River, 
Johnny Appleseed Roadside Park (18115 Haydenville Rd., Nel-
sonville) preserves the stone walls of Hocking Canal Lock 19.  
Approaching Haydenville, a curious little round house appears on 
the right (17092 Haydenville Rd.), built of red clay tiles. The village 
began as an ironworks company town like Buckeye Furnace, but 
by the 1870s, it had transitioned to clay products like the rest of 
this area. Haydenville’s bricks and tiles are showcased as cladding 
and unique ornamentation on a variety of other local house types, 
and especially on the town’s Methodist Church (16798 Haydenville 
Rd.). North of the village, near the US Route 33 interchange, Hock-
ing Canal Lock 17 and Aqueduct Park showcases more of the canal 
builders’ beautiful masonry, including an arched tunnel that car-
ried the waterway and its towpath across a small stream. Take US 
Route 33 to return to Logan or Lancaster.
TO THE MUSKINGUM ROUTE
A short scenic drive east from Athens reaches historic Marietta and the Muskingum 
River confluence: Take US Route 50 and State Route 7 to enjoy a portion of the Ohio 
River Scenic Byway. Or use State Route 550 through Amesville and Bartlett; about four 
miles north of Amesville, a mound stands near a weathered old church in the remote 
Mound Hill Cemetery (16971 SR 329, Amesville, photo on page xiv).
Public Square is the heart of Nelsonville and a focal point for the arts, with an opera house, 
shops, restaurants, and galleries.


--- PDF PAGE 102 ---

189
Newark lies among the upper tributaries of the Muskingum River. Nearby in Licking County are Blackhand Gorge, with remains of a canal and early rail transport, and Flint Ridge, the source of Ancient Ohio’s most valuable resource. Near the early Zane’s Trace settlement of Somerset is the stone hilltop of Glenford Fort. En route to historic Marietta, with its 
188
10
Muskingum Route
Newark lies among the upper tributaries of the Muskingum River. 
Nearby in Licking County are Blackhand Gorge, with remains of 
a canal and early rail transport, and Flint Ridge, the source of An-
cient Ohio’s most valuable resource. Near the early Zane’s Trace 
settlement of Somerset is the stone hilltop of Glenford Fort. En 
route to historic Marietta, with its impressive earthworks, the 
winding, scenic course of the Muskingum has been canalized:  
A series of old hand-­crank locks still operate in the quaint villages 
along its banks.
An ashlar stone canal towpath was built against the cliff of Blackhand Gorge, even as 
the namesake Black Hand was being destroyed.
BLACKHAND GORGE
The Licking River has carved an unusual narrow chasm through a 
high sandstone ridge east of Newark, named after an American In-
dian petroglyph—­a Black Hand—­left on one of its cliff faces long ago.
Orientation. The Blackhand Gorge State Nature Preserve is ten miles 
east of Newark, via State Route 16 (2200 Gratiot Rd. SE, Heath). Its 
namesake Black Hand petroglyph, though now lost, has inspired 
many Indigenous legends: One proclaimed this was the boundary 
of long-­sacred lands, where no man could raise his “hand” against 
another. The river here would have been a route for the valuable 
Flint Ridge flint, on its way down from the nearby ancient quarries 
to the earthworks at Newark and beyond. The Black Hand has given 
its name to the type of sandstone bedrock stretching south from 
here through the Hocking Hills.
Transportation Relics. In 1828, this section of the river became part 
of the Ohio and Erie Canal. The Black Hand was destroyed when the 
stone towpath was constructed along the riverbank. Later, the Ohio 


--- PDF PAGE 103 ---

190
191
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
The hiking trails at Flint Ridge 
display beautiful outcrops of the 
rainbow-­colored rock, prized here for 
thousands of years.
The former Perry County Courthouse anchors 
Somerset’s Pennsylvania-­style town square.
Central Railroad cut a deep crevice through the ridge here—­now the 
park’s Blackhand Trail, stained by soot from steam locomotives. An 
electric interurban trolley line also came through a tunnel here on its 
way from Zanesville to Newark, Columbus, and Indianapolis. A high 
trail skirts the large quarry where Black Hand Sandstone was taken 
for many of central Ohio’s monuments, bridges, and canal locks.  
A separate trail (across the river from the parking lot) passes a nearly 
intact canal lock hidden in the woods on its way to the abandoned in-
terurban tunnel, whose 327-­foot length is simply a hole cut through 
solid rock, with no other framing materials or reinforcements.
EN ROUTE TO SOMERSET
From Blackhand Gorge, follow small winding roads for about seven miles through 
scenic countryside to the quarries at Flint Ridge, then about another ten miles to 
the stone hilltop of Glenford Fort and the well-­preserved early town of Somerset just 
beyond.
Flint Ridge. Less than a day’s walk from Newark, this was one of 
ancient America’s greatest treasure sources. At the Flint Ridge An-
cient Quarries (15300 Flint Ridge Rd., Heath), a deposit of beautiful 
rainbow-­colored flint lies close to the surface, where Native people 
have been mining it for thousands of years. The forested ridgetop 
is covered with the water-­filled pits where generations of Indige-
nous people obtained the hard, sharp stone for shaping into weap-
ons and tools, as many as 10,000 years before Newark’s earthworks 
were built—­perhaps significantly—­on the nearest flat river terrace. 
Over millennia, visitors and trade spread Flint Ridge flint all across 
North America. A museum interprets the site, exhibits samples, 
and organizes public events where modern expert “flintknappers” 
demonstrate the ancient techniques of chipping the hard glassy stone 
into beautiful shapes. (Licking County is being transformed now by 
huge new investments from the 
microprocessor industry, but 
local leaders quip that this area 
“has been the center of chip pro-
duction for 10,000 years!”)
Glenford Fort. About ten miles south of Flint Ridge, near the small 
village of Glenford (11995 SR 757, Glenford), lies one of Ohio’s most 
unusual and best-­preserved hilltop enclosures. Although still on 
private land, permits for visitation may be requested online from 
the Perry County Soil and Water Conservation District. A steep 
quarter-­mile climb through beautiful old-­growth forest and re-
stored pine groves is rewarded 
with views of an intact, mile-­
long, all-­stone enclosure wall 
surrounding the hilltop. A stone 
ceremonial mound stands in the 
center. The walls are built on top 
of natural outcrops whose open-
ings create dramatic passages.
Somerset. Of all the towns developed along Zane’s Trace, tiny Som-
erset retains the most authentic form of an early nineteenth-­century 
agricultural market town. While Zanesville and Lancaster were on 
rivers, which meant waterpower and transportation, Somerset’s 
high ridgetop location limited its economic growth. The Old Perry 
County Courthouse (built in 1829) is the best surviving example of 
the once-­common pyramid-­on-­cube design. It anchors one recessed 
corner of the town’s Pennsylvania-­style main square—­laid out on the 
same principle as the one in Lancaster (and in both Somerset and 
Lancaster, Pennsylvania). A second square, three blocks west and 
now called Pigsfoot, was for markets. Two miles southeast, on Old 
Somerset Road, is the Catholic Priory of Saint Joseph, (5796 SR 383, 
Somerset). An 1840s brick structure stands today where Dominican 
friar Edward Fenwick (who was from Kentucky) consecrated the first 
Roman Catholic church in Ohio; 
his original 1818 log structure 
attracted settlers coming along 
Zane’s Trace. (Several round barns, 
dating from the early 1900s, are 
within a few miles of Somerset; in-
quire locally.)
The stone enclosure walls of the 
Hopewell-­era Glenford Fort stand atop 
natural outcrops in old-­growth forests.


--- PDF PAGE 104 ---

192
193
infrastructure, 
preserved 
and 
maintained as the Muskingum 
River Parkway State Park. Small 
riverfront waysides accompany 
each lock and overlook its ad-
jacent weir in McConnelsville, 
Stockport, Beverly, and other 
small towns and villages along 
the river.
McConnelsville. Far from the major highways, the villages of the 
Muskingum Valley preserve their early ambience with small local 
commerce and fine examples of historic architecture. McConnels-
ville’s unusual diamond-­shaped town square is a gem of preserva-
tion, anchored by the Morgan County Courthouse and the grand 
restored 1892 Twin City Opera House (offering many programmed 
events). Excellent historic commercial and res-
idential buildings line East Main Street as far as 
Eighth, where an elegant, dressed-­sandstone 
house is part of a historic bed-­and-­breakfast. 
The smaller village of Stockport, ten miles 
south, contains many well-­preserved wood-­
framed houses as well as the large restored 
Stockport Mill, now a restaurant and inn 
overlooking one of the river’s largest water-
falls (1995 Broadway Ave., Stockport).
Big Bottom Massacre. Along a peaceful stretch of riverbank (and 
State Route 266) southeast of Stockport, a park and historical 
marker commemorate the place where a small band of early set-
tlers were killed by the Indigenous inhabitants in January of 1791. 
The group had moved upriver from the new colony at Marietta and 
went beyond the territory then authorized for settlement. Despite 
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
THE PENNSYLVANIA DUTCH
Many German-­speaking people passed through this region of Ohio, from 
Pennsylvania or directly from Europe, following Ebenezer Zane’s new 
highway. (The term “Dutch” referred to speakers of Germanic languages—­
Deutsch—­before it came to be applied to people from the Netherlands.) 
Especially Rheinlanders, after the Napoleonic Wars, brought their language, 
customs, and various religions (Mennonite, Catholic, Lutheran, Jewish) with 
them. Many were commercial agriculturalists open to innovative large-­scale 
operations to grow abundant crops to sell for profit. Around the turn of 
1800, the fact that Ohio was “free country” also gave opportunities to poor 
American whites to become farm workers, which was not possible in 
the pre–­Civil War South due to slavery. The land was cheap, the soil was 
superb, and both Germans and Americans came pouring in along Zane’s 
Trace. Somerset and the route’s other early towns thrived.
The Muskingum River was canalized in 1841 
by a series of hand-­operated locks, still 
functioning in each of its riverside towns; 
this one is at Devola, just above Marietta.
The Twin City Opera House, where the archaeologist Moore-
head lectured about his findings in the area, still dominates 
McConnelsville’s diagonally oriented town square.
New Lexington. The more direct route from Somerset to the 
Muskingum River passes through the town of New Lexington, whose 
ridgetop Main Street has a good collection of historic buildings and 
local commerce. Two-­tone Romanesque details adorn the late-­1800s 
Perry County Courthouse and its tall turreted tower. New Lexington 
is also the home of a huge building products factory still making the 
world-­famous Ludowici roof tiles and continuing the deep history 
of clay products manufacturing in this part of Ohio. An alternate 
route to the river would be via Zanesville, named for its founder 
Ebenezer Zane in 1800. Travelers on his road needed to ferry across 
the Muskingum, here at its confluence with the Licking River. Today, 
the two rivers are crossed by a unique Y-­shaped bridge. Zanesville 
became an important manufacturing center in the early 1800s and 
since then has been especially well-­known for its art pottery.
The Muskingum River. As part of Ohio’s canal-­building program, the 
Muskingum River’s entire 112-­mile length was “canalized” by the addi-
tion of a series of eleven dams with their accompanying channels and 
locks. Opened in 1841, the system created a navigable route between 
the Ohio River (at Marietta) and the Ohio and Erie Canal (at Dresden, 
east of Newark), and from there on to Lake Erie. The hand-­crank 
lock-­control mechanisms are the only such system still functioning 
in the country. Boaters can navigate the river today using this same 


--- PDF PAGE 105 ---

194
195
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
MOOREHEAD’S MOUND REPORT
In 1896, archaeologist Warren King Moorehead and a few aides traveled 
this valley in search of Indigenous sites. His notes describe many things 
now lost, including pictographs on a large boulder depicting bird tracks 
and other figures, plus a great face carved in a rock. He noted that the 
large Sprague Mound stood “directly in the heart of McConnelsville,” 
and that the valley had at least sixty more mounds—­some on the river 
terraces, some with rings, and some high above on the bluffs. The 
locals told him, probably in error, that most of the mounds were places of 
observation rather than burial. His descriptions suggest that, like the 
grouping at The Plains near Athens, they were mainly of the Adena 
tradition. He gave a lecture about his findings in the McConnelsville 
opera house.
WARREN KING MOOREHEAD
Although the young Moorehead began by digging mounds to find artifacts, he 
did come to respect Native Americans and their culture. Historian Jeff Gill tells 
the story: He gets a chance to go west, and ends up literally on the doorstep of 
the Wounded Knee Massacre. What makes Warren’s story so fascinating is that 
he wasn’t there for the massacre. The night before, the commanding general 
personally orders him off the site because, for the previous month, Moorehead 
was the only person who was actually going into the Sioux encampments, 
spoke rudimentary Sioux, and was welcomed into their homes. And so they 
hustle him off the site, and the next day the massacre takes place. After that 
experience, he goes to Washington and tries to literally scream bloody murder 
asking for justice for the Sioux. And his attitude toward 
Native Americans and how to properly handle Native 
American remains—­at least certainly the skulls and 
bones, if not the artifacts—­radically changes. And so 
he goes from being a looter to being an admittedly 
unschooled but very passionate defender of the 
richness and complexity of Native American culture. 
(Link to video is on page 205.)
One of the many tragedies during 
the early years of settlement 
took place here at Big Bottom, on the 
banks of the Muskingum.
The expansive Marietta Earthworks spread across a high terrace above the Ohio and 
Muskingum Rivers.
the known risk that the land’s 
current residents would not wel-
come their presence, they left 
themselves vulnerable. A small 
Lenape and Wyandot war party, 
hoping to prevent further en-
croachment on their lands, killed about a dozen of the settlers. The 
incident illustrates the tragic circumstances of the early settlement 
and displacement process; repeated conflicts and then all-­out war 
continued, and ultimately the tribes were largely expelled from 
much of Ohio following the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794.
MARIETTA
Here stood the easternmost of Ohio’s monumental ancient earth-
work complexes. Its unusual plan included a ringed burial mound, 
two large rectangular enclosures, a set of platform mounds, and a 
wide graded way down to the river.
History and Setting. Marietta is a well-­preserved river town, with 
a deeply layered history laid across a high terrace overlooking the 
confluence of the Muskingum and Ohio Rivers. Veterans of the 
American Revolution laid out the town in 1788—­the first settlement 


--- PDF PAGE 106 ---

196
197
in honor of the French queen, 
Marie Antoinette. They preserved 
many of the impressive Adena and Hopewell earthworks, already at 
least fourteen centuries old, as they built among them. A thriving 
downtown, fine museums, and beautiful residential and historic 
districts make this a rewarding destination. (Check the Marietta-­
Washington County Convention and Visitors Bureau website for 
information, or stop by in person at 241 Front Street.)
The Ohio Company. After the Revolutionary War, the new American 
Congress was in financial straits, and unable to pay all the soldiers. 
A few enterprising New Englanders suggested that land in the West, 
won from the British in the war, would be a good source of reve-
nue for the new government. They persuaded Congress to let them 
form “The Ohio Company of Associates” to broker the deal. Led by 
Rufus Putnam and Benjamin Tupper, two brigadier generals from 
Massachusetts, and the Reverend 
Manasseh Cutler, the company 
bought a huge tract of land along 
the Ohio River at a bargain price, 
then advertised the lots. Enthu-
siasm for the project ran high 
among veteran officers; even 
George Washington, though un-
able to go, wrote, “No colony in 
America was ever settled under 
such favorable auspices.”
Earthworks Preservation. Putnam and his colleagues planned 
their settlement carefully, establishing the earliest preservation 
law in the West to ensure that the main earthworks would be kept 
for “public benefit.” They appointed a committee to determine, 
in their words, “the mode of improvement for ornament, and in 
what manner the ancient works shall be preserved.” They gave 
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
A park in front of the historic Lafayette 
Hotel frames views of the wide Ohio 
River in downtown Marietta.
Besides the town’s name, another French 
connection was the visit here by General 
Lafayette during his tour of the new nation 
he had helped to liberate.
west of the Alleghenies. When Rufus Putnam arrived that year with 
the first forty-­eight men, US Fort Harmar already stood across the 
Muskingum. The local Delaware and Wyandot people were eager 
to trade, although incursions into their homelands were already 
suggesting conflicts to come. The settlers quickly built the Cam-
pus Martius, a fortified stockade just outside the ancient enclosure 
walls, to provide safety for all residents in case of attack. In a nod 
to their Revolutionary War allies, they named their town “Marietta” 


--- PDF PAGE 107 ---

198
199
Newark lies among the upper tributaries of the Muskingum River. Nearby in Licking County are Blackhand Gorge, with remains of a canal and early rail transport, and Flint Ridge, the source of Ancient Ohio’s most valuable resource. Near the early Zane’s Trace settlement of Somerset is the stone hilltop of Glenford Fort. En route to historic Marietta, with its 
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
The ancient Adena-­era Conus Mound is now accompanied by the graves of Marietta’s 
founders, including many Revolutionary War veterans.
MANASSEH CUTLER’S EXCAVATION
The only archaeological investigation of the Conus was done by one of the 
town’s founders, the Reverend Manasseh Cutler, who wrote of his early 
attempt: An opening being made at the summit of the great mound, there 
were found the bones of an adult in a horizontal position, covered with a 
flat stone. Beneath this skeleton were three stones placed vertically at small 
and different distances, but no bones were discovered. That this venerable 
monument might not be defaced, the opening was closed without further 
search. Cutler’s respectful closing of the mound reflected the Marietta 
founders’ admiration for the monuments among which they were building 
their town.
2 Capitolium Mound. Ancient Marietta’s larger square enclosure 
contained four flat-­topped rectangular platform mounds—­an un-
common shape in Hopewell architecture: the Quadranaou Mound 
with four ramps, the Capitolium with three ramps, another with two 
ramps, and a final unramped mound. The Capitolium still stands be-
side Fifth Street near Washington, where a principal gateway once 
opened into the now-­lost large enclosure. In 1918, the Capitolium 
was co-­opted as the foundation of the Carnegie-­funded Washington 
County Public Library, whose 
founders insisted this met the 
criterion of “public benefit” as 
specified in the town’s earth-
works preservation ordinance.
The Anti-­Ramp. One of the Capitolium’s three ramps carries the li-
brary’s front steps to the sidewalk. Another swells in the narrow yard 
behind. The best-­preserved ramp slopes to the alley on the right 
side of the building. On the left side, the ancients designed only a 
kind of hollow between two lobes of Earth (archaeologist Bill Pick-
ard has called this the “anti-­ramp”). In 1990, when the library was 
adding an elevator in the anti-­ramp, excavations confirmed that the 
Capitolium was indeed from the Hopewell era. A buried hearth con-
tained charcoal from many different kinds of trees: Such a collection 
the main features respectful Latin names, evoking their mysteri-
ous antiquity. While inroads were made on the earthworks over 
the years, the town’s vigilance has kept several of them as gems in 
its historic crown. A large ringed mound they named the “Conus” 
and developed their own cemetery around it. One rectangular plat-
form mound became the “Capitolium” and a second, larger one, 
the “Quadranaou.” A broad ramp down to the river they called the 
“Sacra Via”—­and it still suggests grand and solemn processions.
1 Conus Mound. Marietta’s Mound Cemetery (Fifth St. at Scam-
mel) is centered on the ancient Conus Mound. It is a burial struc-
ture, and the best surviving example of the Adena tradition’s large 
conical mounds surrounded by a ditch and ring. A stone stairway 
(added in 1837) ascends to its thirty-­foot summit; the surrounding 
earthen circle and its inner ditch accentuate the mound’s height 
and lovely profile. Toward the northwest, the wall and ditch level 
out to suggest a passage—­an apparent entryway. From this point, 
a subtle swell in the ground extends to where the neighboring 
twenty-­seven-­acre square enclosure once was. Nearby in the cem-
etery are memorials to soldiers of the American Revolution, along 
with later graves.
The ramped platform of the ancient 
Capitolium mound is clearly visible 
beneath Marietta’s public library.


--- PDF PAGE 108 ---

200
201
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
WORLD RENEWAL
The cyclical continuity between life and death is dramatized every winter 
when life seems to die, or hides in the earth like buried seeds, and then 
reawakens every spring. Many Indigenous groups still place this theme of 
World Renewal at the center of their ceremonial life. Human beings have a 
responsibility in this renewal: Without their ceremonies, the world might 
die. Sacred fires are extinguished each year and rekindled. Sometimes 
ancestral spirits are reincarnated in adoptees who recycle the names, 
roles, and responsibilities of the deceased. The Earth Diver creation story, 
in which an animal creates the land by bringing up a bit of mud from 
beneath the water, suggests that mound and earthwork construction 
can also be seen as World Renewal—­a ritual reenactment of the Earth’s 
creation.
The large Quadranaou Mound, with its four symmetrically spreading ramps, stands in a 
park at the head of the ancient Sacra Via.
DATING BY TREE RINGS
Cutler’s curiosity about the age of the earthworks led him to this method: 
When I arrived, the ground was in part cleared, but many large trees 
remained on the walls and mounds. The only possible data for forming any 
possible conjecture respecting the antiquity of these works, I conceived must 
be derived from the growth upon them. By the concentric circles, each of 
which denotes the annual growth, the age of the trees might be ascertained.
He counted 463 rings on one old stump, but then noticed it was coming out 
of another, older ancestor, so he doubled the number. It was a good early 
effort to use a scientific method—­what we now call “dendrochronology.” 
He did not know that the number needed to be doubled again, nor did the 
makers of some much more recent city plaques, which still declare the 
earthworks to be 900 years old instead of closer to 1,800.
This early illustration of the Sacra Via by 
Charles Sullivan suggests the grandeur of 
its tall constructed embankments as they 
approached the riverbank.
recruits. The large park surrounding the Quadranaou is directly adja-
cent to the broad incline of the ancient Sacra Via. It was here or nearby 
where Manasseh Cutler studied tree rings to determine the age of the 
earthworks, whose origins still lay shrouded in mystery at the time.
4 Sacra Via. Old maps and drawings show the Sacra Via as a long 
broad ramp with high earthen walls on both sides, leading up 
from the Muskingum River to Marietta’s large rectangular enclo-
sure. Its monumental 150-­foot width survives as a park linking 
the Quadranaou with the river. The builders excavated the slope 
out of the terrace and riverbank to a depth of at least 15 feet and 
then raised the walls another 8 feet above that. Even without its 
walls today, this is the best evoca-
tion of the monumental, graded 
ways that welcomed river-­borne 
visitors to many of the Ohio 
earthwork complexes. The ramp 
was carefully engineered—­its 
width was crested in the center 
like a modern highway, and its 
suggests a type of Indigenous ritual called “World Renewal” in which 
collections or representations of elements from the natural world, 
or things from the people’s lives, are ritually burned or buried in the 
belief that it helps to ensure the balance and continuity of nature.
3 Quadranaou Mound. The largest of Marietta’s earthworks is the 
well-­preserved Quadranaou. Its broad, rectangular form stands in 
a park at Fourth and Warren Streets—­10 feet tall and nearly 200 feet 
long. Elegant, wide ramps climb to the centers of its four sides. Grand 
gatherings, dances, and games are easily imagined on its level surface. 
During the American Civil War, the Union army used it for mustering 


--- PDF PAGE 109 ---

202
203
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
MUSKINGUM ROUTE
FROM BERMS TO BRICKS
Marietta’s first town council made a special resolution to preserve the 
Sacra Via, in their words, “as common ground . . . never to be disturbed or 
defaced.” But by 1882, when J.P. MacLean visited, the walls were gone. He 
wrote, On inquiring what had become of these walls I was informed that the 
material had been moulded into bricks; that a brick-­maker had been elected 
a member of the town council, and he had persuaded the other members 
to vote to sell him the walls. The bricks ended up in a unitarian church 
down the street. Yet even with only hints of its original walls, this ancient 
roadway remains impressive.
Most spectacular of Marietta’s grand houses 
is the Castle—­a large, turreted, Gothic 
Revival mansion built in 1838 and now open 
to the public.
David Putnam’s stone house was finished 
in 1805 in the typical New England style, 
only seventeen years after the first crude 
settlers’ cabins.
The W.P. Snyder Jr., the last surviving 
steam-­powered sternwheel tugboat, 
is maintained as an attraction in 
association with the Ohio River Museum.
Revolutionary War, and who visited the town in 1825 during his 
grand tour of the newly liberated and expanding nation. Up where 
the ancient earthen walls once stood, wide brick streets are now 
lined with huge trees and beautiful houses in many nineteenth-­
century styles—­most notably the Gothic Revival Castle (418 Fourth 
St., open for tours) and the House of Seven Porches (331 Fifth 
St.)—­as well as monumental churches. The oldest houses in Mar-
ietta are in the New England style familiar to the town’s founders, 
like that of David Putnam (519 Fort St.) on the Fort Harmar side 
of the Muskingum, reached today by a repurposed railroad bridge.
Harmar Historic District. In 1785, three years before Putnam and the 
settlers arrived, Lieutenant Colonel Josiah Harmar had been put in 
military charge of the Ohio Country for the newly formed nation. 
One of his first jobs was to keep illegal settlers out while Congress 
developed their plans to sell off the land. But squatters came any-
how, and were aggravating the tribes in the area, who had agreed 
to an earlier peace treaty. Colonel Harmar ordered a pentagonal 
stockade fort to be built at the mouth of the Muskingum, and the 
officer in charge named it after his commander. Despite its stated 
purpose to keep settlers out (if only temporarily), almost immedi-
ately the new fort encouraged settlement, as the new founders of 
Marietta felt safer in its shadow. The fort is gone, but a small his-
toric district retains the name.
Two Museums. The Ohio History Connection operates two history mu-
seums in Marietta. The Campus Martius Museum tells the story of the 
Ohio Company and the town’s early settlement. It preserves the land 
office where the deeds were signed as new settlers claimed their piece 
of the West. The museum stands on the site of the original Campus 
Martius fortification, preserving a 
section with its rough-­sawn boards 
and meticulously pegged joints. 
Rufus Putnam’s own house also 
provides a glimpse into the lives of 
the first settlers. Nearby, the Ohio 
River Museum (reopening in 2027, 
20-­foot-­high walls were lined with clay to help them survive flood-
ing. Its central axis is aligned with the winter solstice sunset atop 
the high hill across the river.
Historic Architecture. The town of Marietta is a charming place. 
The downtown is large, by turns quaint or elegant, and thriving; 
near the riverfront stands the proud Lafayette Hotel (101 Front 
St.), named after the French officer who helped the US win its 


--- PDF PAGE 110 ---

205
204
Newark lies among the upper tributaries of the Muskingum River. Nearby in Licking County are Blackhand Gorge, with remains of a canal and early rail transport, and Flint Ridge, the source of Ancient Ohio’s most valuable resource. Near the early Zane’s Trace settlement of Somerset is the stone hilltop of Glenford Fort. En route to historic Marietta, with its 
Marietta founder Rufus Putnam’s house, originally part of the Campus Martius fortification,  
is open to visitors inside the Campus Martius Museum.
Resources
VIDEOS AND ANIMATIONS
Many quotes printed throughout this book are excerpted (and sometimes  
lightly edited for clarity) from the author’s interviews with archaeological, 
Indigenous, and interdisciplinary scholars. Videos of seventeen of them,  
plus digitally restored animations of several of the earthworks, are available  
at the following website: ancientohiotrail.org/videos. You can also scan  
the QR code below:
Page 27, Fort Ancient (computer animation)
Page 39, Shawnee Removal (Chief Glenna Wallace)
Page 45, Hopewell Settlement (computer animation)
Page 48, Spruce Hill Fires (Bruce Lombardo)
Page 51, Hopewell Mound Group (computer animation)
Page 60, Saving Junction Earthworks (Nancy Stranahan)
Page 67, Hopewell Agriculture (Bret Ruby)
Page 70, Ancient Astronomy (Anthony Aveni)
Page 75, Elaboration and Ritual (David Cave)
Page 86, Naming Granville’s Alligator (Brad Lepper)
Page 89, The Salisbury Brothers (Brad Lepper)
Page 93, The Moonrise Experience (Jeff Gill)
Page 108, The Shawnee and Ohio (Chief Glenna Wallace)
Page 116, Growing Corn at SunWatch (Andy Sawyer)
Page 130, The Newtown Gorgets (Bob Genheimer)
Page 140, The Serpent of Eden (Brad Lepper)
Page 149, The Ancient Forest (Nancy Stranahan)
Page 167, Portsmouth Area Earthworks (computer animation by Herb Roe,  
courtesy of Scioto Historical)
Page 169, Light and Shadow (A. Gwynn Henderson)
Page 184, Adena and Hopewell (Brad Lepper)
Page 194, Warren King Moorehead (Jeff Gill)
check the website for updates) tells the stories of the river’s ecologies 
and cultures plus its many means of transport—­from dug-­out canoes 
to the largest and finest of the steam-­powered riverboats. Outside on 
the water, the restored sternwheeler W.P. Snyder Jr. offers tours in con-
nection with the museum. The Ohio River Sternwheel Festival every 
September regularly draws 100,000 people to this lovely river town.
Blennerhassett Island. About fifteen miles downstream from Marietta, 
Blennerhassett Island Historical State Park (West Virginia) is a 
worthwhile side trip. The Palladian mansion and gardens of an English 
aristocrat and his wife, it dates originally from the first decade of 
the 1800s. The lavish setting they created here in the wilderness was 
astonishing but short-­lived, as the owner became involved in the Aaron 
Burr treason scandal, and the estate burned to the ground in 1811. 
Tours of the restored house and grounds begin with a sternwheeler 
riverboat ride from downtown Parkersburg, West Virginia.
OHIO RIVER SCENIC BYWAY
The north bank of the Ohio River, for its entire 943-­mile length, is traced by a scenic 
highway route—­upstream from Marietta to Wheeling (West Virginia) and Pittsburgh 
(Pennsylvania), and downstream to Portsmouth, Cincinnati, and beyond. It passes 
through other interesting Ohio towns such as Gallipolis (of French origins) and Ripley 
(of Underground Railroad fame). Forested hills, winding roads, charming towns, local 
food and culture, and nearly continuous river views abound.


--- PDF PAGE 111 ---

206
207
RESOURCES
RESOURCES
Days 9–­11 in Granville: visit the Columbus area, the Newark sites, then via Flint 	
	
Ridge and the Muskingum Route to Marietta.
Days 12–­13 in Marietta: the earthworks and museums, then Athens and Zaleski 	
	
en route to the Hocking Hills.
Day 14: Return via Hocking Hills highlights.
FURTHER READING
Hall, Robert L. An Archaeology of the Soul: North American Indian Belief and Ritual. 
Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 1997. A powerful, detailed presentation 
of the richness, complexity, and continuity of Native American spiritual belief 
across the Midwest and Great Plains, examined through the scholarship of  
history, archaeology, anthropology, linguistics, and mythology.
Hancock, John E., with Marti L. Chaatsmith, Bradley T. Lepper, and Bret J. Ruby. 
Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks. Washington DC: Smithsonian Books, 2026.  
A richly illustrated, general audience presentation of Ohio’s eight UNESCO 
World Heritage–­inscribed earthworks, blending historical, archaeological,  
architectural, landscape, and Indigenous knowledge and perspectives.
Kennedy, Roger. Hidden Cities: The Discovery and Loss of Ancient North American  
Civilization. New York: The Free Press, 1994. A history of the encounters 
between the United States’ founders and the earthworks, how the sites were 
interpreted, and their fate since, by the former director of the Smithsonian 
National Museum of American History and the National Park Service.
Lepper, Bradley T. Ohio Archaeology: An Illustrated Chronicle of Ohio’s Ancient 
American Indian Cultures. Wilmington, Ohio: Orange Frazer Press, 2005.  
A general audience survey of archaeological practice and knowledge covering 
all periods of Ohio’s Indigenous inhabitation, including detailed accounts of 
the Adena, Hopewell, and Fort Ancient–­era earthworks and artistry.
Lynott, Mark J. Hopewell Ceremonial Landscapes of Ohio: More than Mounds and 
Geometric Earthworks. Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2015. A thorough survey of the 
archaeological studies of the principal Hopewell earthwork sites by one of the 
National Park Service’s foremost archaeologists, featuring the detailed excava-
tions at the Hopeton Earthworks carried out under his direction.
Redmond, Brian G., Bret J. Ruby, and Jarrod Burks, editors. Encountering 
Hopewell in the Twenty-­First Century, Ohio and Beyond (Volume One:  
Monuments and Ceremony). Akron, Ohio: University of Akron Press, 2019.  
A collection of essays showcasing the state of the art in Hopewell studies  
since the turn of the current century; volume one covers remote sensing,  
archaeoastronomy, Native ontologies, ritual remains, and iconography.  
Available online.
Redmond, Brian G., Bret J. Ruby, and Jarrod Burks, editors. Encountering 
Hopewell in the Twenty-­First Century, Ohio and Beyond (Volume Two:  
Settlements, Foodways, and Interaction). Akron, Ohio: University of Akron 
Press, 2020. Volume two follows the above, highlighting settlements,  
food production, raw material acquisition, and local and inter-­regional  
interactions. Available online.
SAMPLE ITINERARIES
There may be a month’s worth of travel experiences covered in this book, but 
time limits and preferred travel styles suggest the need to prioritize. Besides the 
star ratings provided, here are a few sketch suggestions for how to visit the  
most important places, some at the optimal time of day, and also to enjoy some 
of the region’s most distinctive lodgings.
Long Weekend Highlights Tour
Day 1: 	Fort Ancient in the morning, lunch in Hillsboro, Serpent Mound by late  
	
afternoon. Dinner and overnight at Adams County’s Murphin Ridge Inn.
Day 2: 	Seip Earthworks and the Hopewell Mound Group loop trail in the morning.  
	
Lunch in Chillicothe and afternoon visit to Adena, dinner and overnight at 	
	
a historic Chillicothe bed-­and-­breakfast.
Day 3: 	Mound City in the early morning, lunch in historic Lancaster or Granville.  
	
Afternoon and early evening visits to Newark’s Great Circle and Octagon 	
	
Earthworks. Dinner and overnight at one of Granville’s historic inns.
One-­Week Highlights Tour with Single-­Night Lodgings
Day 1: 	Cincinnati to Miamisburg Mound, then SunWatch Village. Lunch in Dayton 	
	
or Yellow Springs, afternoon hike in Clifton Gorge. Dinner and overnight at  
	
Lebanon’s Golden Lamb Inn.
Day 2: 	Fort Ancient in the morning, lunch in Hillsboro, Serpent Mound by late  
	
afternoon. Dinner and overnight at the Murphin Ridge Inn.
Day 3: 	Fort Hill hike in the morning, the Appalachian Forest Museum and  
	
Seip Earthworks in the afternoon. Dinner and overnight in downtown 		
	
Chillicothe.
Day 4: 	Hocking Hills highlights (Rock House, Cedar Falls, Ash Cave), overnight in  
	
a cabin.
Day 5: 	Athens or Zaleski in the morning, Marietta’s museums and earthworks  
	
in the afternoon and early evening. Dinner in Marietta and overnight at the 	
	
riverfront Lafayette Hotel.
Day 6: 	Up the Muskingum River, with lunch in Stockport or Somerset. Newark’s 	
	
Great Circle by late afternoon. Dinner and overnight at one of Granville’s 	
	
historic inns.
Day 7: 	Early morning tour of Newark’s Octagon Earthworks, afternoon in  
	
Columbus and the Ohio History Center exhibits.
Two-­Week Highlights Tour from Five Main Lodgings
Days 1–­3 in Cincinnati: Lower Miami Route, Miamisburg, then Dayton area  
	
en route to Lebanon.
Days 4–­5 in Lebanon: Upper Miami Route, Fort Ancient, then Serpent Mound 		
	
en route to Chillicothe.
Days 6–­8 in Chillicothe: the Hopewell Culture National Historical Park sites,  
	
Fort Hill and the Highlands Nature Sanctuary, Portsmouth and the Lower 	
	
Scioto Route, then Circleville and Lancaster en route to Granville.


--- PDF PAGE 112 ---

208
209
RESOURCES
Squier, Ephraim, and Edwin Davis. Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley: 
Comprising the Results of Extensive Original Surveys and Explorations.  
Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge 1. Washington, DC: Smithsonian 
Institution, 1848. The indispensable, magisterial volume filled with beautiful 
lithographs of the earthworks and some of the artistry, with descriptions of 
their form and condition in the mid-­1800s. Reprinted with an Introduction by 
David J. Meltzer, Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998.
Townsend, Richard V., and Robert V. Sharp, editors. Hero, Hawk, and Open Hand: 
American Indian Art of the Ancient Midwest and South. Chicago and New Haven: 
The Art Institute of Chicago and Yale University Press, 2004. A beautifully 
illustrated presentation of artistry from the ancient American Midwest and 
Southeast, interpreted within their cultural contexts and with current  
Indigenous themes and perspectives.
ONLINE INFORMATION
The Ancient Ohio Trail. Legacy National Endowment for the Humanities–­funded  
website and predecessor of this book (dating from 2010), with route and site  
descriptions, quotes, animations, and interviews.  
ancientohiotrail.org
Arc of Appalachia. Visitor information for the Arc’s many preserves, hiking trails, 
accommodations, and earthwork sites.  
arcofappalachia.org
Cincinnati Museum Center. Visitor information for the Edge of Appalachia’s  
preserves and hiking trails. Complementary information is also available at 
The Nature Conservancy’s website.  
cincymuseum.org/trails/
Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks. Information, photos, maps, updates,  
social media, and links for the eight UNESCO-­inscribed earthworks.  
hopewellearthworks.org
National Park Service, Hopewell Culture National Historical Park. History,  
archaeology, and visitor information for the major earthwork sites in Ross County. 
nps.gov/hocu/planyourvisit/index.htm
Ohio Department of Natural Resources. Visitor information for all Ohio  
state parks, state forests, and nature preserves, including trail guides and  
accommodations.  
ohiodnr.gov/home
Ohio History Connection. Visitor information for the agency’s more than fifty 
historic sites and museums around the state.  
ohiohistory.org
Credits
IMAGES
All photographs are by the author unless credited otherwise. All uncredited  
digital images are by media design staff under the author’s direction (1996–­2016) 
at the University of Cincinnati. Uncredited reproductions from pre-­1920s  
publications are in the public domain.
Page xiv, Mound Hill Cemetery. Photo by Steven W. Plattner
Page 31, Red-­orange soil. Photo by Robert V. Riordan
Page 34, The North Overlook. Courtesy of the Ohio History Connection
Page 38, Canoes on Paint Creek. Photo by Hope Taft
Page 43, Seip-­Pricer building plan. After N’omi Greber
Page 52, Magnetometry of Mound 25. National Park Service and Deutsches  
Archäologisches Institut
Page 54, Magnetometry of Hopewell Mound Group’s large circle woodhenge.  
Image by National Park Service and Deutsches Archäologisches Institut
Page 60, Magnetometry of Junction Earthworks. Heartland Earthworks  
Conservancy and Ohio Valley Archaeology. Image by Jarrod Burks
Page 76, Aerial photo of Hopeton. National Park Service
Page 77, Excavation trench at Hopeton. National Park Service photo by  
Mark J. Lynott 
Page 77, Magnetometry of the Hopeton Earthworks. National Park Service and 
Deutsches Archäologische Institut
Page 85, Alligator Mound. Photo by Steven W. Plattner
Page 88, Salisbury map of Newark Earthworks. Courtesy of the American  
Antiquarian Society
Page 95, Octagon walls. Photo by Bradley T. Lepper
Page 97, Aerial view of Great Circle Earthworks. Photo by Steven W. Plattner
Page 109, Principal gateway into the Pollock Earthworks. Photo by Robert V. Riordan
Page 121, Digital reconstruction of Fortified Hill. Image by Virtual Grounds  
Interactive, courtesy of Pyramid Hill Sculpture Park
Page 122, Fernald Preserve visitor center. Photo by Richard Bitting
Page 153, Caleb Atwater illustration. Courtesy of the American Antiquarian Society
Page 153, Atwater’s Circleville Earthworks map. Courtesy of the American  
Antiquarian Society
Page 165, Tremper Mound. Photo by Steven W. Plattner
Page 167, Portsmouth Earthworks. Image by Herb Roe, courtesy of Scioto Historical
Page 171, Ohio Hanging Rock Preserve. Courtesy of the Arc of Appalachia


--- PDF PAGE 113 ---

211
210
CREDITS
Page 175, Hocking Hills (Old Man’s Cave). Photo by Richard Bitting
Page 176, Cantwell Cliffs. Photo by Bret J. Ruby
Page 177, Rock House. Photo by Bret J. Ruby
Page 178, Cedar Falls. Photo by Richard Bitting
Page 191, Glenford Fort. Photo by Jarrod Burks
Page 194, Warren King Moorehead, from his Prehistoric Implements, 1900
QUOTES
Page 6, Suzan Shown Harjo. American Indian Places: A Historical Guidebook by  
Frances H. Kennedy, 2008
Page 22, Monique Mojica. New Canadian Realisms: New Essays on Canadian  
Theatre, Volume 2 by Roberta Barker and Kim Solga, 2012
Page 36, Barnett Newman. Native Moderns: American Indian Painting, 1940–­1960  
by Bill Anthes
Page 44, Marti L. Chaatsmith. Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks UNESCO World  
Heritage nomination text
Page 51, Vine Deloria. God Is Red: A Native View of Religion, 1973
Page 55, James Brown. The Ancient Ohio Trail video archives
Page 62, Roger G. Kennedy. The Ancient Ohio Trail video archives
Page 68, Gerard Baker. The Ancient Ohio Trail video archives
Page 78, Tecumseh. H.B. Cushman, History of the Choctaw, Chickasaw, and 
Natchez Indians, 1899
Page 94, Hitakonanu’laxk. The Grandfathers Speak: Native American Folk Tales of 
the Lenapé People, 1994
Page 94, Linda Poolaw. The Ancient Ohio Trail video archives
Page 96, Glenna J. Wallace. The Ancient Ohio Trail video archives
Page 126, Roger G. Kennedy. The Ancient Ohio Trail video archives
Index
Page numbers in italics refer to 
figures and maps.
A
Abrams, Elliot (archaeologist), 
184–185
Absentee Shawnee Tribe, 107
Adams County, 13, 86, 140, 142
Adena architecture, 11, 98, 183, 198
Adena culture (1500 BCE to 100 CE), 
7, 10–11, 14, 58, 180, 184–185
Adena Mansion and Gardens 
(Chillicothe), 58, 61–62, 61, 62
Adena mounds, 11, 58–59, 103, 104, 
106, 109, 112, 114, 114, 117–118, 
117, 160, 161, 163–164, 163, 180, 
180, 183–184, 183, 198, 198
Allegheny Mountains, 1, 120, 182
Alligator Mound (Granville), 13, 
85–86, 85, 86, 137 
American Revolutionary War, 15, 79, 
125, 195, 198
Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi 
Valley (book), xi, 20, 47, 57, 59, 80, 
120, 121, 158, 159
Ancient Ohio Trail (website), xi–xii
Anderson Earthworks (Indiana), 100, 
116–117
Appalachian Forest Museum 
(Bainbridge), 147–148
Appalachian Mountains, 141, 176
Appalachian Plateau, 8, 37, 55, 
78–79, 135, 141
Arc of Appalachia Preserve System, 
47, 60, 141, 143, 147, 164, 171
Archaeological Conservancy, 168
Archaic period (8000 to 1500 BCE), 10
Armstrong, Neil (astronaut), 26
Art of the Ancients (exhibit, 
Portsmouth), 168
Ash Cave, 178–179, 179
astronomical alignments, 13, 30–31, 
69, 70, 91, 93
Athens, 174, 181–185, 182
Athens County Historical Society, 184
Atwater, Caleb (antiquarian), 19, 27, 
49, 98, 152, 153
Augusta (Kentucky), 148
Aveni, Anthony 
(archaeoastronomer), 70, 70
Avery-Downer House (Granville), 
85, 85
B
Baby, Raymond (archaeologist), 
43, 146
Bainbridge, 38, 40, 133, 147
Baker, Gerard (Mandan-Hidatsa), 68
Battle of Fallen Timbers, 15, 16, 124
Battle of the Thames, 16, 62
Baum Earthworks, 38, 42, 43, 47
Beaver Wars, 14
Berea (a.k.a. Waverly) sandstone, 
46, 47
Big Bottom Massacre, 193–195
Biggs Mound (South Portsmouth, 
Kentucky), 11
Black Hand sandstone, 176, 190
Blackhand Gorge, 188–190, 198
Blennerhassett Island Historical 
State Park (West Virginia), 204
Boneyfiddle District (Portsmouth), 
166, 167
Boone, Daniel (frontiersman), 14, 
15, 107
Boonshoft Museum (Dayton), 115
Bourneville, 47–48
Britain (and British colonials), 14–15, 
170
Brown, James (archaeologist), 55
Brush Creek (a.k.a. Ohio Brush 
Creek), 133, 135, 137, 139, 142
Buckeye Furnace State Memorial, 18, 
172–173, 172
Buckeye Lake, 84, 87
Buckeye Trail, 146
burials, 12, 52, 53, 65, 66, 69, 103, 115
Burks, Jarrod (archaeologist), 21
Buxton Inn (Granville), 85
Buzzardroost Rock (Lynx), 142
Buzzards Roost (Chillicothe), 60–61
C
Caesar Creek State Park, 106
Calvary Cemetery Earthworks 
(Dayton), 112–113
Camp Sherman (Chillicothe), 58, 64
Campbell Park (Columbus), 160
Campus Martius (Marietta), 186, 
203, 204
Canal Park (Circleville), 151, 151
Canal Park (Waverly), 163
canals, 18, 81, 84, 84, 151–152, 151
Cantwell Cliffs (Hocking Hills), 
176–177, 176
Capitolium Mound (Marietta), 
198–199, 199


--- PDF PAGE 114 ---

213
212
INDEX
Fernald Preserve, 121–122, 122
Ferris-Wright Park and Earthworks 
(Dublin), 160
fire (use of), 30, 32, 47–48, 52, 55, 66, 
68, 77, 86, 100, 110, 130, 131, 146, 
172, 179, 200
First Mother (Indigenous tradition), 
94, 139
Flint Ridge Ancient Quarries, 
188–190, 190
Floodwall Murals (Portsmouth), 
167–168, 168, 170
Fort Ancient culture, 13–14, 34, 
114–116, 129, 137, 173
Fort Ancient Earthworks, 6, 7, 13, 
26–36, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35
Fort Harmar (Marietta), 15, 196, 203
Fort Hill, 96, 133, 142–147, 143, 144, 
145, 146
Fort Salem Earthworks, 133–134, 
134
Fort Washington (Cincinnati), 15
Fortified Hill, 12, 121, 121
Foster, 20, 131–132
Fountain Square (Cincinnati), 126
France (and French colonials), 14, 
170
Frankfort Earthworks, 42, 43
French and Indian War, 14
G
Gallatin, Albert (US treasury 
secretary), 19, 20
Gallipolis, 204
Genheimer, Robert (archaeologist), 
130, 130
geometry (in earthwork design), 12, 
22, 40–43, 59, 95–96, 95, 129
Georgian Museum (Lancaster), 81, 82
German Village (neighborhood in 
Columbus), 157
German Village (neighborhood in 
Hamilton), 120
Gill, Jeff (historian), 93, 93, 194
glaciers, ice age, 2, 8–10, 110, 163, 
171, 176
Glen Helen Park (Yellow Springs), 
111
Glenford Fort, 188, 191, 191
Golden Lamb Inn (Lebanon), 24–25, 
25
Gothic Revival architecture, 120, 
202, 203
David Putnam House (Marietta), 
202, 203
Davis, Edwin (archaeologist), 20, 46, 
49, 54–55, 57, 64, 67, 98, 103, 138, 
146, 164–165
Dawes Arboretum (Newark), 104
Dayton, 6, 18, 112–114, 113, 114
Dayton Aviation Heritage National 
Historical Park, 114
Dayton Lane (neighborhood in 
Hamilton), 120
Decorative Arts Center (Lancaster), 
82, 82–83
Deep Cut (Millersport), 84, 84
Delaware (Lenape) peoples, 14, 94, 
156, 170, 196
Deloria, Vine (Standing Rock Sioux), 
51
Delphi (Greece), 57, 157
dendrochronology, 201
Denison University, 85
Deutsches Archäologisches Institut, 
76
Devola, 193
Dodds Memorials Building (Xenia), 
106
Drake, Daniel (antiquarian), 127
Dunmore’s War, 15, 155–156
E
Earth (in earthwork design), ix, 
22–23, 77, 77, 102
Earth (Indigenous traditions), ix–x, 
10, 33, 55, 110, 200
Earth Diver (Indigenous tradition), 
33, 200
Eastern Shawnee Tribe of 
Oklahoma, x, 39, 96, 107, 108
Eastern Woodland traditions, 14, 67
ecological diversity, 9–10, 121
Eden Park (Cincinnati), 127
Edge of Appalachia Preserve 
System, 142
effigy mounds, 52, 85–86, 85, 
135–138, 135
Enon Mound, 111–112
Essenpreis, Patricia (archaeologist), 
30
European diseases, 113–114
F
Fairfield Township Earthworks, 120, 
120
Fairmount Mound, 103, 104
Carillon Historical Park (Dayton), 
113, 113
Carlisle Fort, 118
Castle, The (Marietta), 202, 203
Catholic Priory of Saint Joseph 
(Somerset), 191
Cave, David (comparative religion 
scholar), 75, 75
Cedar Falls (Hocking Hills), 178, 178
Cedarville, 109
ceremonies, 44, 45, 52, 55, 66, 68, 88, 
94, 98, 115, 183, 200
Chaatsmith, Marti (Comanche, 
Choctaw), xii, 44
Cherry Valley (Newark), 88
Cherry Valley Ellipse (Newark), 103, 
104
Chillicothe, 8, 17, 18, 24, 38, 47, 
55–63, 56, 57, 58, 59
chillicothe (Shawnee word), 15, 55, 
107
Cincinnati, 6, 8, 15, 17, 19, 88, 119, 
125–129, 126, 127, 128, 129
Cincinnati Art Museum, 128
Cincinnati Museum Center, 128, 
132, 142
Circleville, 18, 19, 151–155, 153, 154
Civil War, 18, 83, 89, 98, 125, 173, 200
Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), 
34, 80, 98, 144
Clarke-May House (Circleville), 154
Cleves, 124
Clifton Gorge, 7, 105, 110–111, 111
Columbus, 6, 8, 150, 157–161, 159
Conkle’s Hollow (Hocking Hills), 178
Connolly, Robert (archaeologist), 31
construction (of earthworks), 12, 
13, 32, 42, 67, 74, 77, 89, 101–102, 
110, 145, 200
Conus Mound (Marietta), 106, 198, 
198–199
Copperas Mountain, 46, 46
Cornstalk (Shawnee leader), 155
cosmology (Indigenous traditions), 
10, 33, 33
Cowan, Frank (archaeologist), 132
Cross Mound (Tarlton), 80, 80
Cutler, Manasseh (settler), 182, 197, 
199, 201
D
Dafford, Robert (muralist), 164, 167, 
168
Dairy Barn Arts Center (Athens), 182
graded ways (in earthwork design), 
69, 164, 164, 195, 201, 201
Grandview Cemetery (Chillicothe), 
8, 59
Granville, 85–86, 85
Great Circle Earthworks (Newark), 
vi, 88–89, 96, 97–102, 97, 99, 100, 
101, 103
Great Council State Park, 13, 15, 21, 
56, 105–107, 107
Great Hopewell Road, 77–79, 96
Great Miami River, 105, 113, 114, 117, 
119, 122
Great Seal of the State of Ohio (and 
Great Seal State Park), 62, 62, 
78, 78
Greek Revival architecture, 18, 56, 
57, 59, 83, 84, 85, 134, 157, 157
Greene County Courthouse (Xenia), 
106
Greenfield, 37, 37
Gregg-Crites House (Circleville), 154
H
Hamilton, 120–121
Hamilton Lane Library (Hamilton), 
120
Hanging Rock region, 18, 162, 171, 
173
Hargreaves, George (landscape 
architect), 127
Harjo, Susan Shown (Hodulgee 
Muscogee, Cheyenne), 6
Harmar, Josiah (US Army officer), 
203
Harmon Museum (Lebanon), 25–26
Harriet Beecher Stowe House 
(Cincinnati), 18
Harris, John M. (dental educator), 38
Harrison, William Henry (US 
president), 16, 124–125, 127
Hartman Mound (The Plains), 183, 
183
Haydenville, 186–187
Heartland Earthworks Conservancy, 
21, 59
Heizer, Michael (land artist), 23
Henderson, A. Gwynn 
(archaeologist), 169, 169
Henry Mace House (Chillicothe), 
150–151, 151
High Bank Works, 13, 70–71, 71
Highbanks Metro Park (Columbus), 
159, 160


--- PDF PAGE 115 ---

215
214
INDEX
Highlands Nature Sanctuary, 
147–148, 148
Hillsboro, 134
Hitakonanu’laxk (Lenape storyteller), 
94
Hively, Ray (astronomer), 71, 93
Hocking Canal (Haydenville), 
186–187
Hocking College (Nelsonville), 185
Hocking Hills (and Hocking Hills State 
Park), 174–179, 175, 176, 177, 178, 
179, 189
Hocking River, 81, 174–175, 183, 186
Hocking Valley Scenic Railroad 
(Nelsonville), 186
Home Building Association Bank 
(Newark), 87
Hope Schoolhouse (Zaleski), 180
Hopeton Earthworks, 9, 12, 12, 64, 66, 
73–77, 73, 74, 76, 77, 96, 132
Hopewell, Mordecai Cloud, 12, 49
Hopewell agriculture, 10, 67
Hopewell architecture, 12
Hopewell Ceremonial Earthworks 
(UNESCO World Heritage sites), ix, 
xii, 3, 22
Hopewell Culture National Historical 
Park, 40–41, 63, 64, 71
Hopewell material artistry, 11, 20, 40, 
44, 48, 52, 53, 62, 67, 68, 104, 129, 
158, 160, 168
Hopewell Mound Group, 20, 38, 
48–55, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 64, 
76, 132
Horn, Robert (philosopher), 71, 93
Huffman Prairie Flying Field (Dayton), 
144
I
I-houses, 17–18, 18, 150–151, 151
Indian Mound Reserve (Cedarville), 
109, 109
Indian Removal, 17, 29, 107
Indigenous traditions, 2, 32–33, 84, 
100, 101. See also specific topics
Indigenous Wonders of Our World 
(exhibit, Columbus), 158
iron production, 18, 141, 162, 
172–173, 180
Iroquois peoples, 14
J
Jackson, 171–172
Jackson, Andrew (US president), 17
Jeffers Mound (Worthington), 159, 
159
Jefferson, Thomas (US president), 
19, 61, 155
John Bryan State Park, 111
John Glenn Astronomy Park (Logan), 
178
John Treber House (Dunkinsville), 
141, 141
Junction Earthworks, 59–60, 60
K
Kanawha Valley (West Virginia), 8, 
179
Karst landscape, 144, 147
Kennedy, Roger G. (historian), 57, 
62, 126
Kennedy Museum of Art (Athens), 
182
Kenton, Simon (explorer), 14, 107
Kentucky, 11, 14, 53, 79, 141, 155, 
162, 166–167, 168
Kings Hollow Rail Tunnel (Zaleski), 
181
Kinsey Road Mound (Xenia), 106
L
Lafayette, Marquis de, 197
Lafayette Hotel (Marietta), 197, 202
Lake Hope State Park, 179–180
Lancaster, 17–18, 79, 81–83, 81, 82, 
83
Lane-Hooven House (Hamilton), 120
Latrobe, Benjamin Henry (architect), 
61
Lebanon, 24–25, 25, 105
Leo Petroglyphs, 173, 173
Lepper, Bradley (archaeologist), xii, 
78, 86, 89, 89, 102, 140, 184, 184
Liberty Earthworks, 42, 43, 44
LiDAR (light detection and ranging), 
42, 46, 76, 78
Little Cities of Black Diamonds, 
185–186
Little Miami River, 15, 16, 26, 34, 
36, 56, 105–107, 110, 111, 119, 
128–131
Little Miami Scenic Trail, 35, 111, 
131, 132
Locke, John (antiquarian), 137
Locust Grove, 141, 142
Lodge at Hocking College 
(Nelsonville), 185
Logan, 175
Logan, Chief, 155–156
Logan Elm State Memorial, 155–156, 
156
Logan Range (Chillicothe), 55, 59, 62, 
62, 69, 69, 77, 96
Low, John (Potawatomi), 33–34
Lower Shawneetown (a.k.a. 
Shannoah), 14, 155, 167–168, 
170, 170
lunar alignments, long lunar cycle, 
13, 30, 69–71, 90, 91, 92–94, 94
Lynott, Mark (archaeologist), 77
M
Madisonville Site (Cincinnati), 129
magnetometry, 21, 31, 42, 46, 52, 
54, 54, 60, 60, 76, 77, 157. See also 
remote sensing
Majestic Theater (Chillicothe), 58
Mariemont (neighborhood in 
Cincinnati), 129, 129
Marietta, 3, 6, 15–16, 17, 19, 36, 126, 
152, 163, 181, 192–193, 195–204, 
195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 
202, 203, 204
Massie, Nathaniel (surveyor), 38
Maysville, Kentucky, 59, 79, 141, 148
McConnelsville, 193–194
McLean, John P. (antiquarian), 139
Meisner, Gary (landscape architect), 
xiii
Metz, Charles (antiquarian), 20, 129
Miami (Myaamia) Tribe, 13
Miami and Erie Canal, 18, 112, 120
Miami Fort Earthworks, 3, 122–124, 
123, 124
Miami Whitewater Forest, 123
Miamisburg Mound, 11, 105, 
117–118, 117
Milford (and earthworks), 130, 131
Millersport, 84
Mills, William (archaeologist), 58, 
165
Mississippian culture, 13, 136, 139
Mojica, Monique (Guna and 
Rappahannock), 22
Moon (Indigenous traditions), 94
Moonville Rail Tunnel (Zaleski), 181, 
181
Moorehead, Warren King 
(archaeologist), 20, 27, 33, 
193–194, 194
Moorehead Circle (Fort Ancient), 
31, 31
Mound Cemetery (Piketon), 
163–164, 163
Mound City, 20, 53, 63–70, 63, 64, 65, 
66, 69, 74, 76, 103, 122, 165
Mound Hill Cemetery (Amesville), 
xiv, 187
Mound Park (Portsmouth), 166–167
Moundbuilder myths, 19
Mounds State Park (Anderson, 
Indiana), 100, 116–117
Moundsville (West Virginia), 117
Mount Adams (neighborhood in 
Cincinnati), 127–128
Mount Oval (Circleville), 155
Muskingum River (and Muskingum 
River Parkway State Park), 79, 87, 
173, 188, 192–193, 193, 195, 195, 
201, 203
N
National Afro-American Museum 
and Cultural Center (Wilberforce), 
108
National Museum of the United 
States Air Force (Dayton), 114
National Park Service, 20–21, 40, 54, 
76, 77, 108, 114
National Underground Railroad and 
Freedom Center (Cincinnati), 128
Native American Graves 
Preservation and Repatriation Act 
(NAGPRA), 21
Nelsonville, 174, 182, 185–186, 186
New Lexington, 192
New Vienna, 37
Newark, 6, 18, 78, 87–88, 90–91
Newark Earthworks, 20, 36, 86, 
88–89, 88, 103. See also Great 
Circle Earthworks; Octagon 
Earthworks
Newcom’s Tavern (Dayton), 113, 113
Newman, Barnett (artist), 36
Newtown Mounds, 129–130
Niehoff, Buck (attorney and author), 
xiii
Nonhelema (Shawnee leader), 155
Northwest Indian War, 15
Northwest Territory, 15, 56, 58, 125
Norwood Mound, 128, 128


--- PDF PAGE 116 ---

217
216
INDEX
O
Observatory Circle Diameter (a.k.a. 
OCD, unit of measure), 12, 30, 
95, 95
Octagon Earthworks, x, 13, 70, 
88–97, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 98
Octagon Schoolhouse (Sinking 
Spring), 142, 142
Ohio and Erie Canal, 18, 57, 64, 84, 
151–152, 151, 164, 189, 192
Ohio Company of Associates, 16, 
181, 197
Ohio Country, 14–15, 19, 107, 156, 
203
Ohio Department of Natural 
Resources, 170, 176
Ohio Glass Museum (Lancaster), 83
Ohio Hanging Rock Preserve, 171, 
171
Ohio History Center (and Ohio 
Village, Columbus), 7, 158, 158
Ohio History Connection, 20, 26, 41, 
43, 58, 61, 64, 78, 85, 137, 143, 
144, 146, 157–160, 165, 203
Ohio River, 9, 11, 18, 20, 84, 124, 
125, 126
Ohio River Museum (Marietta), 
203–204
Ohio River Scenic Byway, 125, 187, 
204
Ohio State University, 44, 157
Ohio Statehouse (Columbus), 150, 
157, 157
Ohio University, 181, 182, 182
Oklahoma, 2, 17, 39, 106–107
Old Fort Earthworks (South 
Portsmouth, Kentucky), 167–169, 
169
Old Man’s Cave (Hocking Hills), 178
Old Perry County Courthouse 
(Somerset), 191, 191
Oldtown, 106–107
Olentangy River, 159, 160
Order of the Cincinnati (society), 
125, 126
Oregon District (Dayton), 112
Ottawa peoples, 14–15
Otto, Martha (archaeologist), 43
Over-the-Rhine (neighborhood in 
Cincinnati), 127
P
Paint Creek, 37, 38, 38, 60, 149
Paleoindians, 9
parallel walls (in earthwork design), 
18, 30, 74–76, 76
Paul A. Johnson Pencil Sharpener 
Museum (Logan), 175
Peabody Museum (Harvard 
University), 130–131
Pennsylvania, 17, 79, 81, 82, 156, 
191–192
Pennsylvania Dutch, 192
Perry County Courthouse (New 
Lexington), 154
Pickard, Bill (archaeologist), 199
Pickaway County Courthouse 
(Circleville), 154
Pickaway County Historical Society, 
154
Pickaway Masonic Lodge #23 
(Circleville), 154, 154
Pickaway Plains, 15, 155–156
Pike Heritage Museum (Waverly), 163
Piketon Graded Way, 164, 164
pilgrimage, 96, 102, 108
Pollock Earthworks, 105, 108–110, 
109
Poolaw, Linda (Delaware Grand 
Council Chief), 94
Portsmouth, 125, 162, 166–168, 166, 
167, 168
prairie landscape, 9, 89, 107, 121, 
133, 141, 142, 155
Putnam, Frederic Ward 
(archaeologist), 20, 131, 137
Putnam, Rufus (settler), 196–197, 
203
Pyramid Hill Sculpture Park and 
Museum, 121
Q
Quadranaou Mound (Marietta), 
198–201, 200
Quakers, 17, 36
Quiverheart Gorge (Peebles), 141
R
Raccoon Creek, 88, 90, 95, 102
railroads, 18, 58, 125, 152
Raven Rock (Portsmouth), 170
Reese-Peters House (Lancaster), 
82–83, 82
remote sensing, 49, 68, 70, 107, 138. 
See also magnetometry
Riordan, Robert (archaeologist), 
31, 109
Ripley, 148, 204
Robbins Crossing Historical Village 
(Nelsonville), 185, 185
Rock House (Hocking Hills), 177, 177
Rocky Fork Gorge, 7, 147, 148
Ross County Courthouse 
(Chillicothe), 58, 58
Ross County Heritage Center 
(Chillicothe), 58
Rossville (neighborhood in 
Hamilton), 120
Roundtown Conservancy 
(Circleville), 154
Ruby, Bret (archaeologist), xii, 67, 67
S
Sacra Via (Marietta), 70, 199, 
200–202, 201
Salisbury, James and Charles 
(surveyors), 20, 88–89, 97
Sawyer, Andrew (archaeologist), 
116, 116
Scioto River, 40, 55, 63, 67, 69, 73, 151
seasons for visitation, 6, 33, 176
Seip Earthworks, 12, 38, 40–46, 40, 
41, 43, 45, 47, 64, 66, 76, 146
Serpent Mound, 3, 8, 13, 20, 85–86, 
133, 135, 135, 136, 138, 140, 159
Shakers, 25–26, 123
Shaman of Newark (figurine), 
103–104
Shannoah. See Lower Shawneetown
Shawnee Lookout Park (Cleves), 
122, 124
Shawnee peoples, 13–15, 39, 77, 
106–108, 155–156, 170
Sherman House Museum 
(Lancaster), 83
Shetrone, Henry (archaeologist), 
64, 144
Short Woods Mound (Cincinnati), 
125
Shriver Circle (Chillicothe), 65–66, 66
Shrum Mound (Columbus), 11, 160, 
161
Sinking Spring, 141, 142
slavery, 17, 36–37, 128, 192
Smithsonian Institution, 20, 57
smoking pipes, 10, 44, 63, 67, 
164–165
Snake Den Mounds, 157
soil (colors and types), 31, 31, 48, 55, 
74, 77, 101–102, 109–110, 131
solar alignments (solstices), 13, 
30–31, 54, 69, 70–71, 76, 93, 115, 
122, 135–136, 138, 168, 202
Somerset, 82, 188, 190–192, 191
Southeast Ohio History Center 
(Athens), 182
Southern Ohio Museum and Cultural 
Center (Portsmouth), 168, 168
Spirit Barrier (Indigenous tradition), 
100–101
Spring Valley, 106
Spruce Hill, 38, 42, 47–48, 47
Squier, Ephraim (archaeologist), 20, 
46, 49, 54, 57, 64, 98, 103, 138, 
146, 164, 165
Steel Earthworks, 60
Stockport, 193
stone (in earthwork design), 12, 
30–32, 35, 45, 52, 65, 109, 130, 
131, 145
Stonewall Cemetery (Lancaster), 
83, 83
Story Mound (Chillicothe), 58–59
Stranahan, Nancy (director, Arc of 
Appalachia), 60, 149, 149
Stubbs Earthworks, 54, 132
Sullivan, Louis (architect), 87
Sun (Indigenous traditions), 33, 44, 
139
SunWatch Village (Dayton), 13, 34, 
105, 114–116, 115, 116, 117
superellipse (a.k.a. squircle), 68
T
Taft, Hope (First Lady of Ohio), xiii
Taft Museum (Cincinnati), 128, 128
Tarhe “The Crane” (Wyandotte 
Chief), 81
Tarlton (and its Cross Mound), 
79–80, 79, 80
Teays River (and its valley), 8–9, 8, 
55, 59, 65, 71, 74, 122, 125, 150, 
163, 171
Tecumseh (Shawnee leader), 16, 
62–63, 78, 107, 107, 125
Temple of the Winds (Chillicothe), 
56, 57
Tenskwatawa (Shawnee leader), 16
The Plains, 174, 183–185, 183
The Ridges (Athens), 182
Till Plains, 8–9, 150
timber structures, 12, 31, 44–45, 45, 
96, 110, 132, 146


--- PDF PAGE 117 ---

218
INDEX
Trail of Tears, 39
Treaty of Greenville, 15–16, 124, 
157, 159
Tremper Mound, 67, 162, 164–165, 
165
Tribal Nations, 1, 14, 21, 107
tripartite earthworks, 42, 43
Tupper, Benjamin (settler), 197
Turner Earthworks, 129–130, 131
Twin City Opera House 
(McConnelsville), 193, 193
U
Underground Railroad, 6, 37, 108, 
128, 148, 204
Underwater Panther (Indigenous 
tradition), 10, 13, 33, 86
UNESCO (United Nations 
Educational, Scientific, and 
Cultural Organization), ix, xii, 3, 
22, 24, 158
University of Cincinnati (and its 
earthworks), xi–xiii, 23, 23, 127
V
Vikings, 18, 48
Virginia (and Virginians), 14–15, 17, 
36, 47, 56
Virginia Military District, 16, 36, 56, 
87, 134, 151, 155
W
W. P. Snyder Jr. (Marietta riverboat), 
203–204, 203
Wallace, Glenna (Chief, Eastern 
Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma), x, 
xii, 39, 39, 108, 108
Washington, George (US president), 
19, 126, 197
Washington County Public Library 
(Marietta), 199
water (in earthwork design), 10, 
12, 29, 32–33, 33, 51–52, 65, 65, 
100–101, 117, 121, 124, 124
Waverly, 163
Waverly (a.k.a. Berea) sandstone, 
47, 75
Wayne, “Mad” Anthony (US Army 
general), 124
Wayne National Forest (Nelsonville), 
185
Waynesville, 105–106, 106
Wertz, Charles and William 
(antiquarians), 168
West Union, 133, 142
West Virginia, 11, 61, 79, 117, 141, 
186, 204
Wexner Center for the Arts 
(Columbus), 158
Wheeling (West Virginia), 78, 141
White Water Shaker Village, 123
Wilberforce, 108
William Henry Harrison Tomb 
(Cleves), 124
Williamson Mound (Cedarville), 109
Wittich Candy Shop (Circleville), 153
Wolf Plains Mounds and Earthworks, 
183, 183
woodhenges, 31, 54, 54, 76, 77, 96, 
132
woodland ecology, 9–10
Woodruff-Connett Mound (The 
Plains), 184
Works East (Chillicothe), 42, 43
Works Museum (Newark), 87, 87
World Heritage. See UNESCO
World Renewal (Indigenous 
tradition), 200
World’s Columbian Exposition 
(Chicago), 20, 49
Worthington, 159
Worthington, Thomas (Ohio 
governor), 11, 17, 58–59, 61–62, 
78
Wright brothers (aviation pioneers), 
112, 114
Wright Earthworks (Newark), 103
Wright Mound Group (Dayton), 114, 
114
Wright State University, 31, 109
Wyandot (Wyandotte) peoples, 14, 
15, 81, 195–196
X
Xenia, 106
Y
Yellow Springs, 105, 110–111
Youngsholm (Wilberforce), 108
Z
Zaleski Mound Group, 11, 174, 180, 
180
Zaleski State Forest, 179–181
Zane, Ebenezer (settler), 16, 79, 81, 
192
Zane’s Trace, 16, 59, 77, 79, 79, 82, 
141–142, 191–192
Zanesville, 79, 190–192
Zeisberger, David (missionary), 173
